2021. № 1 
В О П Р О С Ы  Я З Ы К О З Н А Н И Я  
С. / Pp. 7–28
 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija
Bound forms, welded forms, and affixes: 
Basic concepts for morphological comparison
Martin Haspelmath
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany; 
Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany; martin_haspelmath@eva.mpg.de
Abstract: This paper proposes definitions of three terms that can potentially be used in answering key 
questions of general morphology and syntax: bound form, welded form, and affix. The term affix is 
sometimes thought to involve phonological “fusion” of some kind, but I propose that it is best de-
fined as a bound non-root that cannot occur on roots of different classes. A bound form (or non-autono-
mous form) is generally defined as a form that does not occur on its own (thus, its definition makes 
no reference to phonology). As a term for a bound form that shows phonological interactions with its 
host, I propose the new term welded form. I discuss the ways in which these terms may (or may not) 
help us justify the syntax-morphology subdivision, and the ways in which these terms may perhaps 
be the basis for justifying speculative classifications such as the well-known isolating, agglutinative 
and flective types.
Keywords: affix, agglutination, alternations, morpheme, morphology, wordhood
Acknowledgements: I have discussed the issues of this paper with many colleagues over the years, but 
I would like to single out Matthew Dryer, David Gil, Chao Li, Östen Dahl, and Harald Hammarström 
for making particularly useful contributions to my thinking. I also thank two anonymous reviewers 
for Voprosy Jazykozanija that made extremely good comments which helped me improve the paper. 
The support of the European Research Council (ERC Advanced Grant 670985, Grammatical Univer-
sals) is gratefully acknowledged.
For citation: Haspelmath M. Bound forms, welded forms, and affixes: Basic concepts for morphological 
comparison. Voprosy Jazykoznanija, 2021, 1: 7–28.
DOI: 10.31857/0373-658X.2021.1.7-28
Связанные формы, спаянные формы и аффиксы: 
Базовые понятия для морфологического сопоставления
Мартин Хаспельмат
Институт эволюционной антропологии Макса Планка, Лейпциг, Германия; 
Лейпцигский университет, Лейпциг, Германия; martin_haspelmath@eva.mpg.de
Аннотация: В статье предлагаются определения для трех понятий, которые, предположительно, 
могут быть использованы в решении ключевых вопросов общей морфологии и синтаксиса: свя-
занная форма, спаянная форма и аффикс. Иногда считается, что понятие аффикса подразумевает 
некую фонологическую «фузию», но я предлагаю определять его просто как связанный морф, 
не являющийся корнем и сочетающийся с корнями только одного класса. Связанная (или не-
автономная) форма определяется как форма, не употребляющаяся изолированно (таким обра-
зом, и ее определение не опирается на фонологию). Для связанной формы, фонологически вза-
имодействующей с опорным элементом, я предлагаю новый термин спаянная форма (welded 
form). Я рассматриваю вопрос о том, как эти понятия могут пригодиться (или не пригодиться) 
© 2021
8 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija 
2021. № 1
для того, чтобы эмпирически обосновать разграничение морфологии и синтаксиса, а также 
умозрительные классификации типа известного деления языков на изолирующие, агглютина-
тивные и флективные.
Ключевые слова: агглютинация, аффикс, морфема, морфология, слово, чередования
Для цитирования: Haspelmath M. Bound forms, welded forms, and affixes: Basic concepts for morpho-
logical comparison. Voprosy Jazykoznanija, 2021, 1: 7–28.
DOI: 10.31857/0373-658X.2021.1.7-28
1. Introduction: 
Three definitions and five principles
In this paper, I propose and discuss the following definitions of three important concepts that 
we need for comparing languages in terms of their morphosyntactic properties.
(1) 
bound form (§4)
A bound form is a form that cannot occur on its own.
(2) 
welded form (§5)
A welded form is a bound form which has shape variants phonologically conditioned by its 
host, or which phonologically conditions shape variants of its host.
(3) 
affix (§6)
An affix is a bound morph that is not a root, that must occur on a root, and that cannot oc-
cur on roots of different root classes.
Morphological typology is an area where traditional stereotypes abound, so it is particularly 
important to be critical of our traditional terminology. Plungian [2000: 81] hints at the problem-
atic nature of two traditional terms when he says in his discussion of the terms root and affix: 
“I do not know a single effective definition of root and affix”.
The present discussion will be based on the following five principles for good general ter-
minology of linguistics (note that I am talking about general terms for general linguistics, not 
about terms for particular phenomena in particular languages).
(4) 
A. All terms intended for technical use should be clearly defined on the basis of other 
well-defined terms, or on the basis of widely understood (quasi-)primitive terms.
 
B. Frequently used terms should be defined in a simple way, so that first-year students 
of linguistics can be expected to understand and remember the definitions.
 
C. The range of application of the definition of a widely used term should not deviate sub-
stantially from its traditional range of application.
 
D. General concepts are comparative concepts (defined in the same way for all languages), 
because each language has its own building blocks.
 
E. A term’s general definition is a comparative definition and thus need not cover the en-
tire domain of what a corresponding language-particular category covers. In other words, 
shared-core definitions of general terms (§7) are fully acceptable.
Before discussing the three definitions in (1)–(3) further (below in §§4–6), I will briefly re-
view some reasons for the need for clear definitions (§2) and I will remind readers of the shaky 
basis for some of the stereotypical terms of traditional “morphological typology” (§3).
 
 Martin Haspelmath 
9
2. Why we need clear definitions
The need for clear definitions of technical scientific terms would seem to be completely un-
controversial, but in actual fact, linguists do not spend much energy on providing clearly defined 
technical terms. Our scholarly associations do not have terminology committees, and my per-
sonal experience shows that many colleagues are not really interested in questions of terminol-
ogy (although they will admit in private that our terminology is often unclear). Terminological 
questions are often seen as inextricably linked to substantive questions, and as long as we do not 
make progress on these, these colleagues do not find terminological clarity urgent.
But without clear terms, we will not be able to tell each other about whatever progress we 
make on substantive questions, because we will not understand each other. So we must separate 
our terminology from substantive questions. The latter may prove intractable for a long time 
to come, but terminological issues are easier to make progress on, as I would like to show here. 
I will discuss the three definitions in (1)–(3) and explain some of their ingredients (so that they 
comply with principle A), and I hope that it will become clear that the definitions of the fre-
quently used terms bound form and affix also comply with the principles B and C.
In the domain of morphology, which has been the subject of linguists’ descriptions for hun-
dreds of years, a particular problem that is not widely recognized is the existence of power-
ful traditional stereotypes. It would seem obvious that a science cannot make progress with-
out ridding itself of stereotypes, but linguists have been slow to recognize these in their ways 
of talking about the structure of “words”. We have usually taken the existence of “words” for 
granted, and we have traditionally treated “inflection” differently from other structures without 
thinking much about these decisions.
Since the beginning of the modern continuous tradition of European academic linguistics 
in the 16th century, grammarians have been talking about “inflection” of “words”, without wor-
rying much about how to recognize words and how to distinguish inflection from “particles” 
of various types. On the other hand, lexicographers have been compiling dictionaries, with 
“word” entries, which are quite separate from grammatical descriptions, and typically published 
in different books. This practice continues until now, and the main innovation that was intro-
duced in the 20th century is the term “lexeme” for a “dictionary word”. The term “word-form” 
for a “grammar word”, coming from the Russian tradition (slovoforma; e.g. [Zaliznjak 1967; 
Mel’čuk 1993–2000]), has not become equally widespread yet (but see, for example, [Haspel-
math 2002]). 1 In addition, there are relationships between different lexemes that are listed in dic-
tionaries, and these are usually described by rules of “derivation” (a 19th century term). So we 
have the following stereotypical entities:
(5) 
grammar:    word-forms,   inflection    (described in paradigms)
 
dictionary:   lexeme,        derivation   (described separately)
But in actual fact, of course, there is a continuum between grammar and lexicon/dictionary (e.g. 
[Jackendoff, Audring 2020]), so terms like those in (5) are perhaps not more than artifacts of the 
European tradition of describing languages in two types of books. This need not be the case — it 
might turn out that speakers do indeed organize their mental knowledge along similar lines (e.g. 
[Pinker 1999]), but whether this is the case is a very difficult and unresolved substantive issue. 
All too often, linguists simply presuppose that there is a distinction between inflection and deriva-
tion, and between grammar and lexicon. But our current knowledge does not bear this out (see, e.g., 
[Plank 1994; Spencer 2013] on the non-existence of a division between inflection and derivation).
Moreover, there is a powerful stereotype of a “morphology vs. syntax” distinction. Morphol-
ogists have their own journals, handbooks and conferences, but there are serious doubts that the 
 
1 In the British tradition, the term grammatical word is sometimes used instead of word-form (cf. [Bauer 
2019: 6]).
10 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija 
2021. № 1
“word” notion, which would be at the basis of such a distinction, is based on more than the tra-
ditional spelling habits of European linguists (e.g. [Haspelmath 2011a; Tallman 2020]). If one 
only lives in morphologists’ circles, one can have many local insights and lead a happy life, but 
one will never find out whether morphology is a distinct domain of Human Language.
When questioned about this, linguists often say in their defense that these traditional choices 
have been “fruitful” or “inspiring”, which is no doubt the case, but there is no reason to think 
that other choices could not have been equally inspiring and fruitful. And in the later 20th cen-
tury, many generative linguists thought that there was a very rich innate grammar blueprint, con-
sisting of many dozens or even hundreds of innate elements. On that view, it made sense to hy-
pothesize that our technical terms correspond to innate elements of the human mind. But this 
view has largely disappeared.
Thus, there is no way around separating our concepts (and the terms for them) from the sub-
stantive issues that we want to address. The question whether morphology is separate from syn-
tax cannot be answered by presupposing the existence of morphology, but only by working 
with low-level concepts that are independent of a possible syntax/morphology distinction, and 
likewise independent of a possible inflection/derivation distinction. The terms bound form (1), 
welded form (2), and affix (3) should be usable in attempts to answer such questions because 
they do not depend on an answer to them. And the terms bound form and affix, which are already 
widely used, should have a clear and widely accepted (retro-)definition, 2 because they are tech-
nical terms that linguists expect to have a clear definition.
3. Morphological comparison and “morphological typology”
By “morphological comparison” as used in the title, I mean the study of differences and simi-
larities between languages and between constructions of the same language with respect to gen-
eral properties of “word-size forms” (where this is a vague term for forms that are roughly of the 
size of words in typical European languages). So even if we do not presuppose anything about 
the existence of a distinct “morphological component” in any language, we may still want to ad-
dress some of the old questions in this domain.
“Morphological typology” is an area with a well-known and well-rehearsed history (e.g. 
[Horne 1970; Comrie 1989: §2.3; Payne 2017; Arkadiev 2020]), and the “types” in (6) with their 
example languages are well-known stereotypes.
(6) 
isolating        Chinese
 
agglutinative   Turkish
 
flective         Sanskrit
 
incorporating   Mohawk
 
synthetic       Latin
 
analytic         English
In fact, for quite some time, the term “language typology” was strongly associated with this 
kind of classification of languages, and it was only with Greenberg’s work (e.g. [1974]) that the 
term came to be applied to a broader range of phenomena.
But as with the inflection–derivation distinction and the syntax–morphology distinction, we 
do not know whether the types in (6) are significant. They come from the early 19th century 
 
2 By “retro-definition”, I mean a definition of an older (but undefined) term that captures the range of uses 
of that term to a very large extent.
 
 Martin Haspelmath 
11
[F. Schlegel 1808; A.W. Schlegel 1818; Humboldt 1822], and were proposed in a period of sci-
ence when racial types were popular (in particular, Johann Friedrich Blumenbach’s division 
of human populations into Caucasian, Mongolian, Malayan, Ethiopian and American races). 3 
But these racial types have been thoroughly discredited for quite some time now and are agreed 
to be not more than racist stereotypes, which should lead linguists to ask whether their morpho-
logical stereotypes have any scientific basis.
Again, in order to find out whether languages (or types of constructions) cluster significantly 
in such a way that the terms in (6) have a real meaning, we need uncontroversial basic terms 
which we can use to test specific hypotheses (see, e.g., [Haspelmath 2009] for an attempt to test 
the “agglutination hypothesis”).
Importantly, these basic terms must be comparative concepts (principle D), because languages 
cannot be compared in terms of their building blocks. Each language has its own categories (de-
fined in terms of its own system), so for comparison, we need concepts that apply to every lan-
guage in the same way, regardless of the specifics of its unique system. This also means that the 
definitions in (1)–(3) need not be applied in the description of particular languages — though 
for reasons of transparency, we should of course define a language-particular “affix” concept 
in a way that yields results similar to (3).
Before moving on to some further discussion of each of the three terms (bound forms in §4, 
welded forms in §5, and affixes in §6), I should note that there is no direct relationship between 
the concerns of this paper and the various “frameworks” that have been prominent in the liter-
ature on general morphology (a-morphous morphology, realizational morphology, Distributed 
Morphology, Paradigm Function Morphology, and so on). Much of the time, these works seem 
concerned with finding the innate building blocks of our biocognitive blueprint for grammar, 4 
which are hypothesized to be the same for all languages. I think that this goal is premature, be-
cause we do not know whether there are any domain-specific, let alone grammar-specific compo-
nents to human linguisticality (= our biological capacity for language). Thus, I envisage a more 
modest goal, namely to describe and compare the structures of languages systematically and 
thoroughly, with the hope of finding generalizations that can eventually point us to larger causal 
connections of diverse kinds. This is what most linguists do anyway in practice, so the present 
paper should be of interest to any linguist, regardless of their wider interests and ultimate goals.
4. Bound forms
The first term that I discuss is the term bound (contrasting with free), which occurs in the 
definition of affix in (3). The term is not uncommon in the literature, but it does not seem to be 
very clear to many linguists what exactly it refers to, as they seem to associate boundness with 
phonological properties. 5 However, a bound form is clearly defined in terms of lack of indepen-
dent occurrence, 6 as in (1) (repeated from §1 above).
 
3 Both Wilhelm von Humboldt (originating from Berlin) and the two Schlegels (originating from Han-
nover) studied in Göttingen around 1790, when Blumenbach was teaching there, so the influence may 
even have been quite direct.
 
4 The innate blueprint for grammar is often called “universal grammar”, and sometimes simply “language 
faculty”, e.g. in Anderson [2008: 811]: “[The] central goal of linguistics: the devising of ways to infer 
the properties of the human language faculty from the available data”.
 
5 A kind of sloppy terminology that one sometimes encounters is the wrong derived form “boundedness”, 
instead of correct boundness. (Boundedness is the property of being bounded, which comes from the 
verb to bound or the noun boundary. By contrast, bound(ness) comes from the verb to bind.)
 
6 I use the expressions independent occurrence, occur on its own, and occur in isolation interchangeably.
12 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija 
2021. № 1
(1) 
bound form
A bound form is a form that cannot occur on its own.
This simple and straightforward definition was given by Leonard Bloomfield (see 7a) when he 
first introduced this term in his book Language, and it is found in many other influential works. 
A selection of further quotations is given in (7b–f) (the emphasis in (a–c) is in the original).
(7) 
a. “A linguistic form which is never spoken alone is a bound form; all others … are free 
forms.” [Bloomfield 1933: 160]
 
b. “Some forms … have the property that on occasion they may occur as whole utter-
ances… This property is freedom; forms that have it are free. Other segmental forms 
are not free, and are therefore called bound.” [Hockett 1958: 168]
 
c. “Forms which never occur alone as whole utterances (in some normal situation) are bound 
forms; forms which may occur alone as utterances are free forms.” [Lyons 1968: 201]
 
d. “Two types of bound morphemes are found attached to (free) words in many languages: 
clitics and affixes, in particular inflectional affixes.” [Zwicky, Pullum 1983: 502]
 
e. “A useful distinction which is often made is that between ‘free’ and ‘bound’ forms. 
A free form can make up a complete word on its own, a bound form cannot. All affixes 
are, by their nature, bound.” [Dixon 2010: 145]
 
f. “We recognize the ability of words to stand alone by saying that they are free forms. 
Units that are incapable of standing alone, such as affixes, are correspondingly called 
bound forms.” [Aronoff, Fudeman 2011: 35]
None of these authors link boundness to phonology, 7 so it is surprising that in actual prac-
tice, linguists often talk about boundness as if it were somehow caused by a form’s phonological 
properties (a search for “phonologically bound” on Google Ngram Viewer will readily confirm 
this; see also the last paragraph of §5). Now it is true that many bound forms appear phonolog-
ically deficient. For example, the Arabic person suffix -tu (as in katab-tu ‘I wrote’) has a short 
vowel, the French definite article le has a schwa vowel, and the Russian preposition s ‘with’ has 
no vowel at all. In Standard Arabic, all free forms have at least a long vowel (or more than one 
vowel), and in French and Russian, all free forms have at least a full vowel. So these forms are 
phonologically different from free forms, and can be seen as deficient.
But phonological deficiency does not explain all cases of boundness. In many or most lan-
guages, there are bound forms that are not phonologically deficient. For example, German -heit 
(as in Weis-heit ‘wis-dom’) is phonologically complete, and so is Spanish -dor (as in refrig-
era-dor ‘refrigerat-or’), but these forms do not occur on their own and are thus bound forms.
Another term pair with the same meaning as bound /  free is the pair non-autonomous /  autono-
mous (e.g. [Plungian 2000: 19]). However, these terms have not been used very widely (and note 
that Lehmann’s [1982/2015] notion of “autonomy of a sign” is much broader).
Independent occurrence (i.e. occurrence as a non-defective utterance) 8 is sometimes said 
to be a problematic criterion because it cannot be investigated by the usual fieldwork methods, 
 
7 Boundness should not be confused with Lehmann’s [1982/2015] notion of bondedness, which is defined 
in very vague terms (including phonological properties): “The syntagmatic cohesion or bondedness 
of a sign is the intimacy with which it is connected with another sign to which it bears a syntagmatic relation. 
The degree of bondedness of a sign varies from juxtaposition to merger, in proportion to its degree of gram-
maticality” [Lehmann 1982/2015: §4.3.2]. Linguists also sometimes use the odd expression “bound mor-
phology”, which seems tautological (presumably non-bound forms are not morphological by definition).
 
8 Of course, when someone is prevented from finishing an utterance (e.g. “a mosqui… ouch!”), the re-
sulting partial expressions are not considered free forms, and neither are partial forms that only occur 
in metalinguistic uses (e.g. “the English -ing form”).
 
 Martin Haspelmath 
13
and because it is a matter of degree. Of course, no criterion is absolutely watertight, but I do 
not think that the boundness status of a form cannot be investigated by the usual methods. 
It may be necessary to set up entire dialogue situations and ask speakers about their naturalness, 
which is not so easy, but which is necessary for other phenomena anyway. Short free forms are 
likely to occur independently in elliptical situations, e.g. in answers to questions. Thus, wa-
ter can occur on its own in English, in particular when answering a question (What would you 
like?), but fork cannot occur on its own. For example, when asked Would you like chopsticks 
or a fork?, the answer cannot be *fork, but must be a fork, showing that fork (unlike water) is 
not a free form in English.
One good thing about the criterion of independent occurrence is that it can very often be ob-
served “in nature”. In actual conversations, speakers utter many short free forms, e.g. OK, true, 
absolutely, hopefully, quickly, I don’t know, and so on. Thus, these forms are easy to recognize 
as free forms. Recognizing bound forms as such is not so easy, because there is no positive cri-
terion for boundness. A bound form is simply a form that is not free, i.e. that cannot occur on its 
own. But in practice, almost all forms that are treated by grammarians as coordinators, sub-
ordinators, discourse markers, (non-demonstrative, non-numeral) articles, flags (case-mark-
ers or adpositions), tense and aspect markers, and agreement markers are bound forms. There 
may be occasional cases of subordinators that can also be used as adverbs (e.g. English before), 
or tense-aspect auxiliaries that can be stranded in elliptical yes-no answers (e.g. the Russian fu-
ture-tense auxiliary, as in Da, budet ‘Yes, she will’), and these are free forms. But by and large, 
there does not seem to be a big practical problem in distinguishing free forms and bound forms. 9
The crucial advantage of the criterion of independent occurrence is that it can be applied in ex-
actly the same way in all languages, and this is what we need for general concepts (principle D 
in (4)). I know of no alternative concept that can give us a definition of “affix” and that can be 
applied uniformly across languages, 10 so I take it as uncontroversial that we minimally need the 
criterion of boundness to distinguish affixes from non-affixes.
A bound form is sometimes bound to a specific type of form, which is called its host 
(following Zwicky’s [1977] terminology), which means that it may occur next to this type 
of form, but not next to other types of forms. For example, the English clitic ’s (from is) oc-
curs following a subject nominal, but not following an adverbial (My friend’s at home; *My 
friend usually’s at home). Affixes are bound to a root (as we will see in §6), and enclitics are 
bound to a preceding host. Bound prepositions like Russian s ‘with’ will surely be said to be 
bound to their complement nominal (e.g. s Volodej ‘with Volodja’), even if they are not re-
garded as proclitics. But languages may also have clause-level particles that are not limited 
to a particular type of host. For example, the German unstressed discourse particle ja cannot 
occur on its own, 11 so it is a bound form. But it does not occur on a specific type of host, as il-
lustrated by the examples in (8) (the particle ja is not reflected in the translation, as there is 
no clear English counterpart).
 
9 It may appear counterintuitive that some English nouns are free forms (water and the other mass nouns), 
while most are bound forms in the singular (fork and the other count nouns). Similarly, while most 
Russian case forms of nouns are free, Locative case forms are bound (e.g. v Moskv-e ‘in Moscow’ vs. 
*Moskv-e [Moscow-loc], see [Plungian, Semionova 2016: 106]). But this situation is probably not un-
common, even though it has not been widely remarked upon. If there is no expectation that boundness 
is a particularly “deep” property of linguistic forms, it is not surprising.
 10 Sometimes the term “attached“ is used in defining affixes, e.g. in Bauer’s [2019: 124] definition of af-
fix: “a morph which cannot stand alone in a sentence, but must be attached to a root to make a word.” 
Bauer does not say what he means by “attached”, and the first sentence of the definition suggests that 
the crucial property of an affix is indeed its boundness (in the sense of (1)).
 11 In addition to this particle, there is also a stressed discourse particle ja, and an answer particle ja ‘yes’. 
These three elements have the same segmental shape, but very different semantic and syntactic proper-
ties, so I treat them as three different forms.
14 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija 
2021. № 1
(8) 
a. Sie arbeitet ja heute viel.
 
b. Heute arbeitet sie ja viel.
 
c. Sie arbeitet heute ja viel.
‘She works a lot today.’ 
Thus, the term bound does not entail any kind of “attachment” to anything. It merely refers 
to the lack of independent occurrence. It is a separate question to what extent bound forms are 
not only restricted in their independence, but also positionally. Impressionistically, it is surely 
the case that bound forms are much more likely to be subject to rigid ordering rules than free 
forms. But it seems that nobody has established this empirically by actually counting. And just 
as there are some bound forms with multiple positional possibilities (as seen in (8)), there are 
also many free forms that obey strict ordering rules. For example, money and more are both free 
forms in English, but they can only be combined in one way (more money, not *money more).
Finally, it should be noted that a bound form need not be a minimal form (i.e. a morph). 
For example, Modern Greek has clitic person forms such as ton ‘him’, tin ‘her’, tus ‘(to) them’, 
tu ‘to him’, and tis ‘to her’. They are bound person forms (or person indexes [Haspelmath 2013]), 
but they are not minimal: They can be segmented as to-n [he-acc], ti-n [she-acc], t-us [he-pl.
obl], t-u [he-gen], ti-s [she-gen], because there are other forms in the language that have these 
kinds of suffixes. These combinations of morphs are constituents and are thus forms, 12 so they 
are bound forms which are not morphs.
Perhaps the most interesting recent discussion of boundness is found in Boye & Harder [2012: 
29], who note that bound forms need not be grammatical forms, but grammatical forms are al-
ways bound because they are by their very nature discursively secondary. The boundness property 
is thus not linked to any architectural properties of language (syntax vs. morphology) or to pho-
nological properties, but to the way languages organize information in discourse.
5. Welded forms
Another widely used metaphor that goes back to American linguistics of the first half of the 
20th century is “fusion”: the idea that morphological elements can show degrees of “coales-
cence”, rather than being “mechanically combined” with each other. 13 Sapir [1921] gave the 
examples of high /  heigh-t and deep /  dep-th, where the root and the affix “cannot be torn apart 
quite so readily as could the good and -ness of good-ness”. Now my question is how this met-
aphor can be translated into a clearly definable criterion.
First of all, it is important to distinguish two different phenomena that are often conflated 
when discussing the distinction between agglutination and flection: cumulation (= joint expres-
sion) of two grammatical meanings or distinctions, and phonological variation. The metaphor 
of “fusion” is often associated with the idea of “lack of clear morpheme boundaries” (e.g. [By-
bee 1985: 45]), and of course, there are no “morpheme boundaries” in a cumulative affix like -ov 
 12 See [Haspelmath 2020] for the definition of the terms morph and form. (A form must be a constituent, 
but how exactly this term is defined is not fully clear. So the notion of ‘a form’ must probably be taken 
as a quasi-primitive concept; see principle A in (4).)
 13 Sapir’s [1921] use of the “mechanic” metaphor echoes F. Schlegel’s [1808] contrast between “me-
chanic” (= agglutinative) and “organic” inflection. Schlegel was not very explicit about the meaning 
of the latter, but he seems to have meant the Indo-European ablaut inflection where one might see more 
“coalescence” of the forms. (Of course, Schlegel’s organic vs. mechanic contrast was associated with 
a value judgement — he regarded the Indo-European patterns as superior. Sapir rejected this view, but 
still continued to use the “mechanic” metaphor.)
 
 Martin Haspelmath 
15
for Genitive Plural in Russian (e.g. [Comrie 1989: 45]). But the presence of cumulation (which 
is widespread for case and number in conservative Indo-European languages) is quite different 
from the presence of phonological variation — the latter is extremely common in the world’s lan-
guages. Many affixes are like -th in English heigh-t and dep-th in that they either have shape 
variants themselves (-th vs. -t) or trigger shape variants in their host (deep vs. dep-). For such 
phenomena, I suggest we use the new term welded form:
(2) 
welded form
A welded form is a bound form which has shape variants phonologically conditioned by its 
host, or which phonologically conditions shape variants of its host.
A few more examples of welded forms are given in (9)–(12).
(9) 
welded non-roots with shape variants
 
a. Russian ‘with’             s toboj ‘with you’     vs. so mnoj ‘with me’
 
b. English indefinite article   a pear                vs. an apple
 
c. German 3rd singular        komm-t ‘comes’      vs. find-et ‘finds’
 
d. Japanese past tense        mi-ta ‘saw’           vs. yon-da ‘read (pst)’
 
e. Russian reflexive suffix    myl-sja ‘he washed’   vs. myla-s’ ‘she washed’
(10) welded non-roots that condition shape variants
 
a. English plural      wife           vs. wive-s
 
b. Polish plural        Polak ‘Pole’   vs. Polac-y ‘Poles’
 
c. Romanian plural    cal ‘horse’     vs. ca-i ‘horses’
(11) welded roots with shape variants
 
a. Russian ‘crumple’   mja-t’ [crumple-inf]        vs. mn-u [crumple-prs.1sg]
 
b. Spanish ‘say’        dig-o [say-prs.1sg]         vs. dic-e [say-prs.3sg]
 
c. Polish ‘mother’      matk-a [mother-nom.sg]    vs. matc-e [mother-dat.sg]
(12) welded roots that condition shape variants
 
a. Russian infinitive            mo-č’ [be.able-inf] (root mo(g)-)  vs. pe-t’ [sing-inf]
 
b. Gothic nominative singular  harj-is ‘army’                     vs. haird-eis ‘shepherd’
Even though a welded form is defined as a kind of bound form, 14 we may say that two ele-
ments that occur together are “welded together” if only one of them is welded in the sense of (2). 
For example, the two forms in pass-ed can be said to be welded together even though only the 
suffix is welded.
It is actually not so clear in what sense welded forms conform to the “fusion” metaphor 
because there is no problem with identifying the morph boundaries in (9)–(10) (and in Sa-
pir’s original examples heigh-t and dep-th, there is no problem with boundaries either). There 
is “coalescence” (“growing together”) in the sense that two forms that are welded together 
 14 Of course, free forms may also have shape variants that are phonologically conditioned, e.g. English 
write, which has the shape variants [raɪt] and [raɪɾ] (in writ-ing). But intuitively, the intimacy of the pho-
nological connection between adjacent forms is relevant only to the nature of bound forms, and this is 
reflected in the definition in (2).
16 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija 
2021. № 1
typically have a history of occurring in a sequence, which made the phonological change 
possible.
So it seems to me that the new term welded is more suitable for the sense in (2), for which 
“fused” has sometimes been used. 15 For example, Bybee [1985: 4–5] talks about the “de-
gree of morpho-phonological fusion of an affix to a stem”, by which she means “the extent 
to which the stem and affix have a morpho-phonemic effect upon one another”. But note that 
weldedness as defined in (2) is not a matter of degree: Either a bound form is welded or it 
is not welded.
The sense in (2) was also prominent in Alpatov’s [1985] proposal for classifying bound forms 
in the world’s languages (see [Arkadiev 2020: §2] for recent discussion of Alpatov’s paper). 
He distinguished three types of grammatical markers:
(13) a. flexions:          attached directly, shape variants
 
b. formants:         attached directly, no shape variants
 
c. function words:   separable by free forms
The distinction between unwelded and welded forms is very much in the spirit of Alpa-
tov’s distinction between flexions and formants (see also [Alpatov 2018]).
I should now add a few remarks about the precise meaning of shape variants in (2). There 
are three clear ways in which a grammatical meaning may be expressed in a variable way, ex-
emplified by (14a–c).
(14) a. automatic phonetic alternations
 
 
English    let [let]                  vs. lett-ing [leɾɪŋ]
 
 
Spanish    veo [beo] ‘I see’         vs. lo veo [loβeo] ‘I see it’
 
 
German   leb-en [leːbən] ‘live‘     vs. leb [leːp] ‘live (impv)‘
 
 
Russian    nós-it [ˈnosʲɪt] ‘carries’   vs. nos-í [nɐˈsʲi] ‘carry (impv)’
 
b. morphophonological alternations (shape variants of the same form)
 
 
Polish     mlek-o ‘milk‘     vs. mlecz-ko ‘milk (dim)’ 
 
 
English    wife              vs. wive-s
 
 
Spanish    cont-ar ‘count’   vs. cuent-o ‘I count’
 
 
Russian    zamok ‘castle’    vs. zamk-i ‘castles’
 
c. suppletive alternations (different forms)
 
 
English    plural      cow-s                    vs. ox-en
 
 
Latin      future      lauda-bi-t ‘will praise’   vs. audi-e-t ‘will hear’
 
 
Russian    plural      knig-i ‘books’            vs. pis’m-a ‘letters’
 
 
M. Greek  genitive   spiti-u ‘of the house’     vs. poli-s ‘of the city’
 15 One might say that there is “true fusion” of two elements if the “resulting form” shares features of both 
“underlying forms”, as in Russian moč’ ‘be able’ (12a), which may be said to be “fused” from mog- 
[be.able] plus -t’ [inf] (cf. [Plungian 2001: 670]). However, this presupposes an abstract analysis 
in terms of “underlying” and “derived” forms, which cannot be done in an objective way that would be 
suitable for cross-linguistic comparison and general linguistics.
 
 Martin Haspelmath 
17
By shape variants, I mean in particular the morphophonological alternations as in (14b). 
The suppletive morph sets in (14c) are not included, because they are clearly different forms, not 
shape variants of the same form [Haspelmath 2020]. In the same way, automatic phonetic alter-
nations of the type (14a) are typically excluded from discussions in morphology because they 
are regarded as being purely a matter of phonology, so they should not count as shape variants. 
To make this clearer, the definition in (8) could be made more precise, to say “A welded form 
is a bound form which has non-automatic shape variants…”. I have not done this, because the 
definition is already fairly complex (almost too complex for principle B).
Unfortunately, while everyone agrees that the three broad types in (14a–c) are different, lin-
guists have not found ways of drawing clear boundaries between them, despite looking for such 
boundaries for decades. For example, is the English alternation between [-d] and [-t] in the En-
glish past-tense suffix an automatic alternation (14a) or a morphophonological alternation (14b)? 
This is hard to say, because it does not occur in other forms, and there are not many similar al-
ternations (though the related [-s/-z] alternation in plural forms suggests that it is an automatic 
alternation). There was a lot of work on drawing the boundaries between automatic and morph-
ophonological alternations in the 1980s and 1990s (often in terms of “postlexical” vs. “lexical” 
behaviour of “affixes” and “clitics”, e.g. [Dressler 1985; Miller 1992; Anderson 1992; Halp-
ern 1995; Kiparsky 1996; Monachesi 1999]). I do not have anything to contribute to the ways 
in which the boundaries should be drawn here, so I will not say more about this. 16 Note also that 
phonologically conditioned shape variants need not be due to an adjacent bound form: In the 
Spanish contrast between contár and cuénto (14b), the stem change is conditioned by stress. Pro-
sodic properties also seem to be important for many people’s intuitive notion of “fusion”, but 
they are left out of consideration here (this would be a separate project).
I conclude that the notion of welding as defined here can serve as the basis for further research 
to explore the intuition that phonological interactions involving bound forms have larger signifi-
cance (as in Bybee 1985, and in much of the literature on “fusion” vs. “agglutination”). It seems 
best to avoid the vague term “fusion”, and it also seems wise to avoid talking about “phonologi-
cal boundness”. This latter term is actually used quite commonly, but I have never seen it defined 
in a textbook or survey article. We saw in §4 that boundness, as usually defined in the literature, 
has nothing to do with phonological properties. Thus, when linguists talk (loosely) about “pho-
nological boundness”, what they actually seem to have in mind is weldedness. 17
6. Affixes
To conclude the discussion of the three key terms that were introduced in §1, let us look at the 
term affix. For a long time, I was not sure how to define an affix, because the literature shows 
that the various criteria that have been given for distinguishing between affixes and clitics do not 
 16 However, it is important not to confuse “(morpho-)phonological variants” with “phonologically condi-
tioned variants”, as is sometimes done. For example Alpatov [1985: 94] describes Turkish vowel har-
mony variants as “phonologically conditioned variation”, when in fact he means “purely phonological 
variation” (i.e. 14a). Crucially, suppletive alternations as in (14c) may also be phonologically condi-
tioned, even though the forms that vary are not phonologically similar (e.g. the Dutch plural suffixes 
-en and -s, whose distribution depends on the phonological properties of the host noun).
 17 Some linguists seem to use “phonologically bound” also when an element is somehow prosodically de-
pendent, e.g. by lacking its own stress properties (like Ancient Greek clitics; I did this in [Haspelmath 
2002: §8.2]). It is for such “obligatorily stressless” elements that one could perhaps justify the idea that 
phonologically deficient elements cannot occur on their own (cf. the discussion in §4). However, as just 
noted, I leave prosodic properties out of consideration in the definitions of this paper. By lumping sev-
eral different properties together (as I did in [Haspelmath 2002]), one is not likely to find phenomena 
that are comparable across languages.
18 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija 
2021. № 1
converge [Haspelmath 2011b; 2015; Bickel, Zúñiga 2017]. The approach proposed by Zwicky & 
Pullum’s [1983] famous paper does not yield clear results in the world’s languages.
However, once one adopts the principle E in (4), namely that our comparative defini-
tions may be definitions of the shared core of what is found in languages, we can define affix 
as in (3).
(3) 
affix
An affix is a bound morph that is not a root, that must occur on a root, and that cannot oc-
cur on roots of different root classes.
Tense suffixes (almost) always occur on verbs, possessive prefixes always occur on nouns, 
and comparative suffixes always occur on adjectives. By contrast, typical clitics occur on words 
of various classes. For example, the Russian interrogative enclitic li can occur on verbs (znaeš’ 
li? ‘do you know?’), adjectives (zdorov li? ‘is he well?’), adverbs (zdes’ li? ‘here?’), and so on. 
Recall also the example of the German clause-level particle ja in (8a–c) above, which is not an af-
fix even though it is a bound form. The definition in (3) does not make reference to weldedness 
at all, and this seems right, because some elements that are clearly not affixes are welded forms 
(e.g. the English indefinite article: a or an, depending on the phonological context).
So for a large class of elements, this definition immediately makes the right subdivisions. 18 
It also conforms with Alpatov’s [1985: 95] definition of “function words” as opposed to “flex-
ions/formants” (cf. 13 above): Alpatov says that the main feature of function words that distin-
guishes them from affixes is that “other lexical units” can occur between them and “the stems 
to which they belong”. For example, the Russian preposition v ‘in’ might be said to be an affix 
by Zwicky & Pullum’s criteria, because the shape variants v and vo are distributed in a partly 
idiosyncratic way. However, as Alpatov notes, it does not always occur immediately next 
to the noun (“the stem to which it belongs”), but can be separated from it by adjectives (e.g. 
v bol’šom dome ‘in (a) big house’). Plungian [2000: 21] calls this property of non-affixes sep-
arability. In the parlance of the definition in (3), we would say that the preposition v can oc-
cur “on noun roots”, but also “on adjective roots”. Thus Russian v, as well as all other Russian 
prepositions, are not prefixes.
Another example is the English indefinite article. The shape variants a and an cannot be due 
to an automatic phonetic alternation, but the article is not a prefix, because it can occur not only 
on nouns (a house, an apple), but also on prenominal adjectives (a big house, an open house).
In the same vein, Polish person-marking clitics are not “floating affixes” (e.g. [Crysmann 
2006]), because they can occur on roots of different classes:
(15) a. W   domu        to     zrobili꞊ście?
in    house         that   did꞊2pl
‘Did you do that at home?’
 
b. W   domu꞊ście   to     zrobili?
in    house꞊2pl     that   did
‘Idem’
These forms have long been a thorny problem in Polish because they are welded forms (in that 
they occasionally influence the shape of their host). But weldedness and affixhood can some-
times go different ways.
Now what exactly is meant by “occurring on a root”? Many affixes occur not immediately 
adjacent to a root, but are (or may be) separated from it by another affix, e.g. Latin person-num-
ber suffixes (-s, -isti, etc.)
 18 But it is not compatible with the idea that there can be “phrasal affixes” (e.g. [Anderson 1992; Börjars 
2003]), although an affix may of course occur at the edge of a phrase (cf. the discussion of Japanese 
flags in the last paragraph of this section).
 
 Martin Haspelmath 
19
(16) a. lauda-s       ‘you praise’
 
b. lauda-bi-s    ‘you will praise’
 
c. lauda-v-isti   ‘you have praised’
These are affixes because they occur next to other elements that are affixes, too. If the future 
form -bi and the perfect form -v were not affixes, then person forms like -s and -isti would not 
be affixes either. So we need to define the notion of “occurrence on a root” as follows:
(17) occurrence on a root:
A bound form X is said to occur on a root Y if it occurs directly next to the root or next 
to an affix that occurs on the root.
This gives the desired result for a large number of affixes that always occur on nouns (pos-
sessive affixes, number affixes, case affixes, various types of derivational affixes), affixes that 
occur on adjectives (comparative and superlative affixes, attenuative affixes, abstract-noun 
affixes), and affixes that occur on verbs (voice, aspect, evidentiality, tense, mood, argument 
affixes). 19
If a bound form occurs next to another bound form that is not an affix itself, it does not qualify 
as an affix. Consider the Turkish examples in (18), where the question is whether person-num-
ber indexes like -sun [2sg] are suffixes.
(18) a. gel-iyor-sun      [come-prog-2sg]      ‘you are coming’
 
b. gel-iyor mu-sun   [come-prog qp-2sg]   ‘are you coming?’
 
c. su mu             [water qp]             ‘water?’
Based on the spelling (and maybe also on the vowel harmony), one might think that -sun 
is a suffix in (18a), but it follows the question particle mu, as seen in (18b). This question par-
ticle is not root-specific, but can also occur on a noun (in 18c), so it is not an affix (and Turk-
ish spelling does not treat it as such). Therefore, the bound person marker -sun is not an affix 
by the definition in (3).
Note also that there is no need, on the definition given here, to say which form an affix “be-
longs to” (cf. Alpatov’s formulation earlier in this section). While it is perhaps clear that a com-
parative affix “belongs to” an adjective, and a plural affix “belongs to” a noun, this is much less 
clear in other cases, because affixes often have a larger semantic scope. Thus, a case affix may be 
said to belong to the entire nominal whose role it marks, and not merely to the noun. And a tense 
affix may be said to belong to the entire clause (or at least the entire predication) whose tem-
poral location it expresses, not merely to the verb. But if a bound role marker always occurs 
on nouns, it is a case affix, and if a bound tense marker always occurs on verbs, it is a tense af-
fix, regardless of its semantic scope.
The formulations in (3) and (17) are neutral with respect to ordering, so they do not exclude 
the possibility of affixes that occur on different sides of the root under different conditions. Thus, 
the bound person forms for objects in the Romance languages are affixes, because they always 
occur on verb roots. Italian object “clitics” as in (19) are discussed by Monachesi [1999] (though 
her reasons for a treatment as affixes rather than clitics are far more complex).
(19) Italian
 
a. mi da     ‘gives to me’ (indicative)
 
b. da-mmi   ‘give to me’ (imperative)
 19 Note that the definition is recursive in that an affix may occur next to an affix that itself occurs next 
to an affix, and so on.
20 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija 
2021. № 1
The next question is: What exactly does it mean that a bound form occurs on roots of “differ-
ent classes”? Recall from principle D above that the definitions must apply in the same way to all 
languages, so there can only be one answer: The root classes must be the three classes in (20).
(20) a. noun = thing root
 
b. verb = action root
 
c. adjective = property root
It is only these three root classes that can be used in cross-linguistic comparison because they 
can be identified in all languages (cf. [Croft 1991; Haspelmath 2012; 2021]).
There may be other kinds of elements that we may be tempted to call “roots” (maybe “pronoun 
roots”, or “temporal adverb roots”), but there does not seem to be any need to include them, because 
they are marginal in one way or another. This also means that we can define the term “root” as in (21).
(21) root
A root is a morph that denotes a thing, an action, or a property.
This is important for the definition of affix because an affix is defined as a non-root morph. 
There have been many attempts to distinguish affixes from roots in other ways (cf. the discussion 
in [Plungian 2000: §I.3.1]), but I think that we need a simple way of defining affixes, as a type 
of bound morphs that are not roots. (One may also say that an affix is a marker that cannot oc-
cur on roots of different root classes, because the term marker is best defined as a bound morph 
that is not a root, in the sense of (21).)
Now what about case-markers that may occur both on nouns and on adjectives (e.g. Latin 
hort-us nov-us ‘new garden (nominative)’, hort-i nov-i ‘of the new garden (genitive)’, etc.)? And 
what about gender markers that occur both on adjectives and verbs (e.g. Russian byl-a interesn-a 
‘was interesting’, with feminine singular -a)? Or plural markers that occur on nouns and adjec-
tives (e.g. Spanish casa-s nueva-s ‘new houses’). The answer is perhaps surprising: These are 
not affixes by the definition in (3). But I think that it is the right answer after all, as I will dis-
cuss in the next section (§7). 20
However, it should be noted that while the definition of affix given in this section should be 
acceptable for the discipline of linguistics, this in no way implies that affixhood (or a notion 
of wordhood that might build on it) must be significant for understanding Human Language. 
It could still be that our propensity to use the term “affix” is more based on European spelling 
habits than on anything in languages. To see the problem, let us briefly compare Russian prep-
ositions (e.g. v ‘in’, s ‘with’, na ‘on’) and Japanese case-markers (e.g. nominative ga, accusa-
tive o, dative ni). The former are not prefixes (as we saw), but the latter may well be suffixes, 
because they seem to only occur on nouns. If this is the case (see [Spencer, Otoguro 2005: §5] 
for discussion of these elements), then what can we conclude from this? It does not really seem 
to tell us anything about the nature of these forms, because it has to do with the order of nouns 
and adjectives: In Russian, adjectives are prenominal, so that NP-initial flags cannot be prefixes 
(by our definition). In Japanese, nouns are always final in the noun phrase, so NP-final flags are 
suffixes. But this seems to be a fact about the order of adjective and noun, not a fact about the 
nature of the role-marking elements (for this reason, the term flag is better suited for compar-
ative purposes, as noted in [Haspelmath 2019]). 21 Since the subdivision of grammar into mor-
 20 A reviewer notes that one could distinguish different degrees of word-class sensitivity. I have defined 
affix as showing strong sensitivity (being limited to a single root class), while stereotypical clitics show 
no sensitivity at all. Eventually, we want to measure such differences, and one could of course use a dif-
ferent cut-off point for the term affix. The choice proposed here is also driven by considerations of sim-
plicity (principle (B) in (4); see also note 25 below).
 21 In Basque, an SOV language that shares some typological features with Japanese, adjectives happen 
to follow nouns. As a result, the Basque flags are postpositions, not suffixes, but this is hardly a signif-
icant difference between Japanese and Basque.
 
 Martin Haspelmath 
21
phology and syntax seems to be (at least in part) based on the difference between affixes and 
“words”, these accidental factors in the identification of affixes indicate that there is probably 
no deeper significance to this traditional subdivision.
7. Shared-core definitions of comparative concepts
All languages consist of extremely complex sets of forms and regularities, and they are harder 
to compare than the stereotypical cases may suggest. Historical linguists and lexical typologists 
routinely compare words of different languages based on their meanings, and study phenomena 
such as colexifications (e.g. [List et al. 2018]). But even very simple phenomena such as ‘hand/
arm’ colexification are not completely straightforward, because a language might have two dif-
ferent terms, with one of the terms meaning ‘hand plus forearm’ (cf. [Brown 2005] for discus-
sion). So when we treat such a language in the same way as English (rather than like Russian, 
which has a single word, ruka, for ‘hand or arm’), we are ignoring some aspects of the diversity.
But this is unavoidable, because the goal of cross-linguistic comparison cannot be complete 
comparison of all aspects of a language. We always need to focus on some parts where the com-
parison seems particularly fruitful. Bickel & Nichols [2013] are explicit about this in their WALS 
chapters about morphological typology: Instead of considering the entire range of case mark-
ers and tense-aspect-mood markers, they focus on a single characteristic marker (a grammati-
cal case marker, a past tense marker, etc.).
Likewise, technical terms that are intended for general comparison cannot be defined in such 
a way that they always cover the entire range of phenomena in a particular language. When ret-
ro-defining an existing term, we need to focus on the shared core of what the term denotes in the 
actual literature (cf. principle C and E). Since [Foley, Van Valin 1977] at the latest, it has been 
known that the term “subject” cannot be defined in such a way that it covers all the relevant 
phenomena in each individual language, and at the same time applies to all languages. So Com-
rie [1978] and Dixon [1979] proposed to use the terms S, A and P for those arguments of verbs 
that are readily comparable across languages, and Dixon used “subject” in the sense of “S or A” 
(what Kibrik [1997: 291] calls “principal”). This does not cover all cases, because “dative sub-
jects”, “expletive subjects” and all kinds of other phenomena in various languages are not in-
cluded, but it certainly covers the shared core of what linguists have called “subject”. It allows 
us to make general and comparative statements (e.g. “Both Russian and Persian show agreement 
of the verb with the subject”), even though it does not extend to special cases. The role-types S, 
A and P are defined with respect to a rather narrow set of verb types (single-argument change-
of-state verbs, two-argument physical-effect verbs), but it is only with verbs of this type that lan-
guages behave uniformly [Haspelmath 2011a]. So strictly speaking, experiential verbs (including 
common perception verbs like ‘see’) are not included in the general definition. But in practice, 
this does not matter much, because there is no question which argument is the English Subject 
in Kim saw her. There is also no question how to call this syntactic function in English (Subject, 
because it matches the general “subject” quite well).
So cross-linguistic comparison removes some language-particular facts from consideration 
for purposes of general linguistics, but in cases like “subject”, this is not a problem, because the 
shared core can still be compared in alignment typology in a very fruitful way. Likewise, I think 
that it is not a problem that the definition of affix in (3) is a shared-core definition. It does not 
cover all phenomena that have been called affixes in particular languages, and that we proba-
bly want to continue to call affixes. For example, Russian has several participial forms of verbs 
that can themselves take number-case suffixes, e.g. znajušč-aja ‘knowing (nom.sg.f)’, zna-
jušč-uju ‘knowing (acc.sg.f)’, znajušč-ix ‘knowing (gen.pl)’. But these number-case suffixes 
occur not only on such verbs, but also on adjectives, e.g. bol’š-aja ‘big (nom.sg.f)’, bol’š-uju 
‘big (acc.sg.f)’. So are these elements affixes or clitics? Well, from a Russian perspective, we 
22 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija 
2021. № 1
want to say that they are Russian Affixes. But from the general perspective of the definition in (3), 
they are not affixes. This may at first sound unintuitive, but it is no more problematic than say-
ing that in Kim saw her, Kim is not a subject from a general perspective.
Cross-linguistic comparison must concentrate on those aspects of languages that are com-
parable, and as a consequence, general definitions of grammatical terms must often be defined 
in terms of a shared core of phenomena. Not all grammatical terms require a shared-core defi-
nition (the term bound of §4 can be used cross-linguistically in the same way as in particular 
languages, because the definitional criterion of independent occurrence is so simple), but many 
of them do. However, we have seen that it is not problematic in any way.
8. Back to “morphological typology”
Now that we have clear definitions of the terms bound, welded and affix, does this help us 
with the “morphological types” that go back to the Schlegels and Humboldt (§3)?
Let us consider a set of straightforward expressions for location in five languages, correspond-
ing to five of the six types in (6) above.
(22) a. Mandarin Chinese   zài Shànghǎi   ‘in Shanghai’     (isolating?)
 
b. Turkish              İstanbul’da     ‘in Istanbul’      (agglutinating?)
 
c. Latin                Brundisi-i      ‘in Brundisium’   (flective?)
 
d. Sanskrit             Śiv-e           ‘in Śiva’          (synthetic?)
 
e. English              in Glasgow                       (analytic?)
The affix concept of §6 allows us to say that the Turkish, Latin and Sanskrit markers are af-
fixes, as opposed to the Chinese and English markers, which can occur on roots of different 
classes (both English and Chinese nouns may be preceded by modifying adjectives). So these 
examples might be taken to exemplify the common definition of isolating languages in terms 
of “lacking morphology”. The term “analytic” does not seem to have a meaning different from 
“isolating” (in practice, it is not much used for classifying entire languages, but it is often used 
for “analytic constructions”; cf. [Haspelmath, Michaelis 2017]).
Now this might be taken as a basis for computing indexes of analyticity/isolation and syn-
theticity along the lines of Greenberg [1960] (see [Payne 2017: 82–87] for recent discussion). 
We might identify roots and affixes in corpora of different languages and count how many affixes 
there are in each language. 22 But would this help us distinguish types that are relevant beyond 
this counting exercise? Recall from §6 (last paragraph) that the distinction between an affix and 
a non-affix may have to do with word order possibilities. This can also be illustrated by Hebrew, 
which has a preposed locative marker like Chinese and English.
(23) Hebrew   be-Ħaifa   ‘in Haifa’
But Hebrew has no prenominal adjectives, so the “preposition” be- is actually a prefix by the 
definition in §6. As a result, Hebrew but not Chinese or English would be synthetic on this 
count, just as Japanese but not Basque would be synthetic (see note 21). This would be consis-
tent, but apparently unrevealing. The widespread idea that “morphology” is somehow “com-
plex” while “isolating” structures are “simple” (cf. [Gil 2008]) is thus not straightforward at all. 
 22 But recall that this would allow us to count only those elements that are affixes on verbs, nouns and ad-
jectives. Elements which occur on personal pronouns, on demonstratives, on auxiliary verbs etc. could 
not be counted. So the counts would not be exhaustive (cf. §7), but apparently still representative.
 
 Martin Haspelmath 
23
Placing a grammatical marker in a fixed position where it is always next to verb or a noun is not 
more complex than placing it in a fixed position where it is always at the beginning of a noun 
phrase or a verb phrase.
Next, what about the difference between agglutinative and flective languages? One might say 
that agglutinative languages are those with few welded forms, both among the roots and among 
the affixes, while flective languages are those with many welded forms (using the new term 
welded form of §5). Plungian [2001: §2.1–2] discusses the flective type in these terms, as does 
Payne [2017: 87]. So what about Turkish, the language that is always mentioned as a paradigm 
case of an agglutinative language (cf. 22b)? It is well-known that Turkish has suffixes which vary 
by vowel harmony (and a kind of consonant harmony), e.g. İstanbul’da ‘in Istanbul’ vs. Paris’te 
‘in Paris’. So is the locative suffix -da/-de/-ta/-te welded, according to our definition? I would say 
that it is, because vowel harmony is a morphophonological alternation, not an automatic pho-
netic alternation (recall the three-way distinction in (14)). But as I said, the precise boundaries 
are not agreed among linguists, 23 and it would take a major effort to come up with clear types 
and technical terms for them that can be applied in an objective way.
But Plungian and Payne also add cumulation as an additional ingredient of flective lan-
guages, in line with the earlier literature. 24 For example, like Latin and Sanskrit in (22c–d), 
Russian shows cumulation of case and number meanings (24a), while Modern Armenian does 
not (24b).
(24)                 nom.sg   ins.sg    nom.pl     ins.pl
 
a. Russian      sten-a    sten-oj    sten-y       sten-ami    ‘wall(s)’
 
b. Armenian   ban-∅    ban-ov    ban-er-∅   ban-er-ov   ‘thing(s)’
But is cumulation closely related to weldedness of forms? As I noted earlier, cumulation is not 
common, while welded forms are extremely common in the world’s languages. And in an earlier 
preliminary study (Haspelmath 2009), I did not find that weldedness correlates with cumulation.
The technical terms defined in the present paper do not allow us to make progress with re-
gard to cumulation, because cumulation can be identified only if it is fully clear which gram-
matical meanings are expressed by a form. And this is rarely as clear as in the classical number 
and case paradigms. For Spanish verb inflection, Payne [2017: 88] notes that the form habl-ó ‘s/
he spoke’ could be said to express five meanings (or “categories”): indicative mood, third per-
son, singular number, past tense, and perfective aspect. But whether “perfective” and “past” are 
separate meanings is not quite clear (the aspectual contrast is not relevant for present and future 
tenses), and the “indicative meaning” is also not fully clear (there is no future subjunctive, and 
“subjunctive” forms are as much syntactically as semantically determined). So before we can 
compute a general “cumulation” index, we would have to find a way to determine the number 
of grammatical meanings that a form expresses.
Thus, the new, rigorously defined terms of the present paper help us only in limited ways 
in understanding whether the old “morphological typology” still has any value. It may well be 
that it will have to go the way of Blumenbach’s classification of human races, and it may be wise 
for the moment to continue to put question marks behind all these terms (as was done in (22)).
 23 Alpatov [1985: 94] regards Turkish vowel harmony as purely phonological, not morphophonological 
(i.e. (14a), not (14b)). The reason why I do not regard it as an automatic phonetic alternation is that it 
is violated in many Turkish roots (of Arabic or Persian origin). Its effects can be seen by linguists also 
in non-borrowed roots, but it is obligatory in the language system only in morphological/morphosyn-
tactic contexts.
 24 In addition, Plungian mentions suppletive alternations as in (14c) (cf. also [Haspelmath 2009]). These 
are sometimes mentioned as typical of flective languages, but they do not seem to have anything to do 
with “fusion” or “lack of clear morpheme boundaries” (so maybe they are mentioned primarily because 
they are common in Indo-European).
24 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija 
2021. № 1
9. Back to the purposes of general terminology in linguistics
It should have become clear by now that the simple definitions of common terms (bound form, 
affix, root) proposed in this paper are not based on brilliant new insights on how the perennial 
problems of grammatical terminology can be solved. However, what is probably quite new here 
(compared to attempts such as [Bloomfield 1933; Hockett 1947; Mel’čuk 1982; Mel’čuk 1993–
2000]) are two realizations:
(25) General linguistics must be based on comparative concepts, 
 
while particular linguistics must be based on language-particular categories.
(26) Widely used terms must be defined clearly as comparative concepts.
The first entails that the definitions must be independent of language-particular phenomena 
(principle D in (4)), which rules out many of the criteria that have been discussed in the liter-
ature. Of course, if one decided to follow the approach of “building block uniformity” (as is 
characteristic for traditional generative grammar), then the picture would look rather differ-
ent: One may hypothesize that a category such as “affix” or “clitic” is an element of our in-
nate grammar blueprint, and then there is no limit to the kinds of symptoms that one might 
use to identify affixes or clitics (cf. [Haspelmath 2015]). But if one has no great trust in a rich 
set of innate grammatical elements, then one must base general linguistics on comparative 
concepts.
The second realization is that if there is no clear definition of widely used terms, linguists 
will continue to be as confused as they have been over the last decades. Textbooks will continue 
to present salient examples and hope that their readers will somehow form the right concepts, 
based on the examples. But if a textbook does not define a term, the readers will not understand 
what it means and will instead create their own stereotype. This may often lead to the appear-
ance of widespread agreement, as noted by Plungian [2011: 18]:
 
“As in many other cases, when we deal with traditional concepts of linguistics that rely 
on the intuition of speakers of European languages and a long descriptive practice, it is 
often much simpler to give an acceptable result of classification than to identify those cri-
teria on which this result was based.”
However, if the criteria are not clear, then the “acceptability” of a classification may be based 
on shared stereotypes rather than on true differences in the world (recall from §3 the failure of ra-
cial classifications, which were widely accepted for a long time, but which were shown to be 
without any scientific foundation).
Now it may of course turn out that the comparative definitions proposed here will not be par-
ticularly helpful, or rather that other definitions will be much more useful for gaining insights 
about Human Language. This is a separate question that I do not deal with here. But until we 
have clearly better general concepts and terms, we must continue working with terms like “af-
fix” and “root”, and they should have clear and simple definitions. 25 (Other terms, such as “fi-
nite” or “markedness”, may not be amenable to retrodefinition, so they should be abandoned. 
But in general, proposing a retrodefinition is preferable to proposing abandoning a term, because 
such negative recommendations are rarely effective.)
 25 A reviewer asked whether it is a scientific requirement that frequently used terms should have simple 
definitions (recall principle B in (4)). The answer is of course no: It is a purely practical requirement, 
and if we had very good reasons to think that an affix concept that requires a very complex definition is 
needed, then we should use such a definition for this term. But since we do not know much about what 
concepts yield the best results, we should choose a simple definition (for practical, including pedagog-
ical purposes).
 
 Martin Haspelmath 
25
Finally, there is a further question that some readers may have: Need the definitions be cat-
egorical, as I have presented them in this paper? Wouldn’t it be more appropriate to have defi-
nitions that are fuzzy or vague, corresponding to the fuzziness or continuity that we find in the 
actual world (cf. [Plungian 2000: 20])? The reason why I think that the definitions cannot be 
fuzzy or prototype-based is that we need these terms in order to test hypotheses. The terms are 
our “units of measurement”, analogous to the SI units in physics. It does indeed seem to be the 
case that many languages have more or less fuzzy categories. But some categories are not fuzzy 
at all. 26 And while there are many cases of vagueness or unclarity of cross-linguistic concepts 
(what exactly is “finiteness” of verbs? what exactly is “left dislocation”?), there are other cases 
where cross-linguistic classification is very clear (e.g. demonstratives, question pronouns, nu-
merals and negative markers are readily identified across languages).
So the extent to which a phenomenon is fuzzy is an empirical question, and to answer such 
questions, we need good research tools: general terms that are not defined in a stereotypical 
or subjective way, but in a simple straightforward way so that all linguists understand the terms 
in the same way. It appears that many linguists think that this is not possible or not a worthwhile 
task, but this paper has tried to show that it is possible (at least for bound and welded forms and 
for affixes), as long as one understands that the definitions must sometimes be shared-core defi-
nitions (principle E, §7). But since the definitions are comparative definitions anyway and can-
not be applied to particular languages, this is not a defect of these definitions.
ABBREVIATIONS
 26 For example, it is very clear what a verb is in Russian, or what a vowel is in German; there do not seem 
to be any unclear cases of “verb-noun” hybrids or “vowel-consonant hybrids” in these languages.
acc — accusative
dat — dative
dim — diminutive
f — feminine
gen — genitive
impv — imperative
inf — infinitive
ins — instrumental
nom — nominative
obl — oblique
pl — plural
prog — progressive
prs — present
sg — singular
qp — question particle
