ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
84 
УДК 81’37 
DOI 10.47388/2072-3490/lunn2021-55-3-84-98 
 
FIGURATIVE IDIOMS WITH EMBEDDED ETHNONYMS IN BRITISH 
MEDIA DISCOURSE 
 
Svetlana Yu. Pavlina 
 
N. A. Dobrolyubov Linguistics University of Nizhny Novgorod,  
Nizhny Novgorod, Russia 
 
The research examines the functioning of conventional idioms containing ethnonyms in mod-
ern British public discourse, featuring the way they are employed in newspaper articles. Eth-
nonyms are treated as nominations of ethnic communities that often represent some stereotyp-
ical treatment of an out-group that may seem inappropriate from political correctness perspec-
tive. The study is set in the critical discourse analysis framework and employs definitional 
and contextual analyses. The research shows that being incorporated in the semantic structure 
of figurative idioms ethnonyms can either connote some negative attitude or be devoid of any 
connotation. When used in media discourse the first type of idioms is involved in some play 
on their figurative and literal meanings, which creates the defeated expectancy effect. Instead 
of connoting some negative attitude to an ethnic group, they serve rhetorical purposes riveting 
and retaining the readers’ attention thus enhancing the perception of the author’s message. 
When non-connotative figurative idioms with embedded ethnonyms are used in the contexts, 
they undergo some transformations and develop new meanings. As a result the reference to a 
specific ethnic group becomes opaque. It is possible to conclude that the current usage of this 
group of figurative idioms is not affected by their “etymological memory”. The research 
shows that the employment of conventional idioms containing ethnonyms in media discourse 
is a powerful rhetorical tool which helps to affect the readers’ perception and convey the mes-
sage in a laconic and expressive way without violating the rules of political correctness and 
inclusiveness. 
Key words: ethnonym; media discourse; idiom; political correctness; ethnic stereotypes. 
 
Этнонимосодержащие образные идиомы в британском медиадискурсе 
 
С. Ю. Павлина 
Нижегородский государственный лингвистический университет  
им. Н. А. Добролюбова, Нижний Новгород, Россия 
 
Работа посвящена исследованию функционирования конвенциональных образных иди-
ом, содержащих этнонимы, в современном британском общественном дискурсе, в пре-
ломлении к тому, как данные языковые единицы используются в газетных статьях. Эт-
нонимы рассматриваются как номинации этнических групп, которые часто выражают 
стереотипные представления по отношению к «чужим», что в настоящее время может 
выглядеть неприемлемым с точки зрения политической корректности. В основу работы 
положен критический дискурсивный анализ, кроме того, применяются дефиниционный 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
85 
и контекстуальный методы исследования.  Анализ материала показывает, что этнони-
мы, входящие в состав образных идиом, способны выражать негативное отношение к 
какой-либо этнической группе, в то же самое время часть исследуемых языковых еди-
ниц являются оценочно нейтральными. Первая группа идиом используется в медиадис-
курсе с целью создания экспрессивности, при этом обыгрывается их метафорическое и 
прямое значения, что создает эффект обманутого ожидания. Вместо того, чтобы транс-
лировать негативное отношение к какому-либо этносу, этнонимосодержащие конвен-
циональные образные идиомы выступают как риторическое средство, призванное при-
влечь и удержать внимание читателей, что способствует адекватному восприятию ав-
торского посыла. Анализ использования идиом с этнонимами, не выражающими этно-
стереотипы, показывает, что данные образные языковые единицы подвергаются транс-
формации и развивают новые контекстуальные значения. В результате они утрачивают 
связь с обозначаемой этнонимом общностью, что позволяет утверждать, что в анализи-
руемых контекстах «этимологическая память» данной группы образных идиом не ска-
зывается на их контекстуальном употреблении.  Исследование показывает, что исполь-
зование этнонимосодержащих конвенциональных образных идиом в современном бри-
танском медиадискурсе является эффективным риторическим инструментом, воздей-
ствующим на восприятие текста и позволяющим лаконично и экспрессивно передать 
авторский замысел, не нарушая нормы политкорректности и инклюзивности.  
Ключевые слова: этноним; медиадискурс; идиома; политкорректность; этнические 
стереотипы. 
 
1. Introduction 
The interrelation of language and culture has been a focal point of re-
search in recent decades. One of its many facets deals with the linguistic repre-
sentation of such complex social and cultural phenomena as race and ethnicity. 
The linguistic units denoting a certain ethnic group called ethnonyms mirror a 
linguistic community’s world view (Shastina 2008; Pavlina 2018). The nature of 
ethnonyms and their linguistic status remain a contentious issue among scholars, 
as there is no consensus about their belonging to proper or common names. An-
other aspect that should be clarified is the types of entities described by ethno-
nyms (Koopman 2016).  The Finnish scholar R. Grünthal observes that the defi-
nition of the term is not as clear-cut (cf. Greek éthnos ‘people’ + ónoma ‘name’) 
as it seems (Grünthal 1999). The author assumes that ethnonyms encompass not 
only the names of people, but also place names (Grünthal 1999). At the same 
time some researchers establish the difference between the names of ethnic 
groups and the nomination of inhabitants of a particular location. The former fall 
into the class of enthonyms, the latter are called demonyms. According to 
Chesnokova and Radovic, ‘demonyms universally represent linguistic devices 
for expressing territorial and regional identity’ (Chesnokova & Radovic 2020: 
1017). When the term ethnonym is treated broadly, it becomes synonymous to 
realia that include the names of some specific tools, artifacts and personal 
names (Teliya 1996). It is evident that the spheres to which the term ethnonym 
can be attributed remain blurred and require some clarification.  
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
86 
Another strand of ethnonym-related research concerns their idiomatic use. 
These linguistic units are involved in some metaphoric mapping and become a 
part of conventional idioms. Ethnonyms incorporated into figurative expressions 
are culture specific linguistic units that tend to reflect stereotypes about an out-
group (Boyadzhieva 2010). A considerable body of research is focused on eval-
uative meanings of phraseological expressions containing ethnonyms (Kolshen-
skaya & Diakova 2015; Soboleva 2008; Archdeacon 1983). The scholars ana-
lyse the way such linguistic units reflect certain ethnic stereotypes. It is evident 
that nowadays the idea of stereotyping seems to be quite obsolete. Since the 
public perception of ethnicity and its linguistic representations have been evolv-
ing, it is important to reveal if the usage of figurative idioms with embedded 
ehnonyms is appropriate in modern public discourse from the political correct-
ness perspective. The functioning of conventional idioms with embedded ethno-
nyms in public discourse remains an under-researched area. To fill this gap in 
modern idiomatic scholarship the analysis of English idioms containing ethno-
nyms was carried out and their functioning in British media discourse was inves-
tigated. The sample includes figurative expressions with such ethnonymic nomi-
nations as Dutch, Russian, Greek, Irish, Chinese, Indian, Ethiopian, Mexican 
and 143 contexts of their usage in British media discourse, singled out from The 
Guardian articles. The study addresses the following research questions: 
1. What semantic features do figurative idioms with embedded ethnonyms 
possess? 
2. Is the usage of ethnonym-containing idioms in media discourse con-
sistent with the ruling social paradigm of political correctness and inclusiveness?  
 
2. Literature review 
Idioms are traditionally treated as linguistic units that encapsulate some 
information about basic codes of culture. The Russian scholar Teliya believes 
that such information is expressed in the cultural connotation of the phraseologi-
cal units (Teliya 1993). The research by Kovshova distinguishes between the na-
tional specificity of phraseologisms and their cultural specificity and introduces 
the algorithm of their identification. According to the scholar, phraseologysms 
contain information about the history and culture of a language community that 
includes the knowledge of some common patterns of behavior and the set of 
values shared by the members of this community (Kovshova 2016). The cultural 
aspects of an idiomatic meaning are the centerpiece of the research conducted by 
Dobrovol’skiy and Piirainen. The scholars assume that it is necessary to analyse 
the cultural basis of idioms to understand their motivation, since various types of 
cultural knowledge are encoded in phraseologisms, in particular they are em-
bedded in the semantics of symbolically motivated figurative units that employ 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
87 
certain cultural conventions (Dobrovol’skiy & Piirailen 2006). Some of such 
conventions are connected with the way the members of a linguistic community 
perceive themselves and others.  
Idioms encode and transmit the information about the system of values 
relevant for the linguocultural community which includes some stereotypes 
about their own ethnic community as well as other ethnic groups. One of the 
means to draw a line between the in-group and the out-group is to create the im-
age of your own ethnic group setting it in contrast to other ethnic communities. 
The stereotypical representations of the in-group are called autostereotypes, 
while the term heterostereotypes is used in reference to the out-group. Au-
tostereotypes embedded in phraseological expressions, including proverbs, tend 
to connote some positive attributes that a certain ethnic group believes to pos-
sess, asserting national identity (Gorokhova 2016, 2017). For example, the pa-
remiological system of the Polish language is characterized by the following au-
thostereotypes: a Pole is courageous, noble, hardworking, patriotic, patient, pi-
ous, capable of standing up for himself (Raina & Shestakova-Stukun 2019).  
The creation of stereotypes is based on the process of some complex phe-
nomena simplification, when something complicated, heterogenious and multi-
faceted is reduced to the form which is perceived as a cliché. The creation of 
ethno-specific stereotypes can be compared to the application of one and the 
same measuring stick to diverse representatives of a certain ethnic group, which 
actually discards their individuality in an attempt to reveal some archetypical 
features. The stereotypes that address ethnicity tend to be biased, so the linguis-
tic units that reflect heterostereotypes connote a certain attitude to the given eth-
nic group which is reflected in their affective meaning. According to Kochetkov, 
the semantics of idioms that contain ethnonyms is determined by extralinguistic 
factors (Kochetkov 2002). One of its manifestations is a certain ethnocentricity 
that underpins evaluative representations of some out-groups. In fact the in-
group is perceived as a model one, while the out-groups are placed below it on 
the scale of values. This hierarchy mirrors heterostereotypes that treat the out-
group properties as unnatural or inappropriate (Kochetkov 2002).  
One of the extreme manifestations of ethnocentricity in the language is the 
terms that are called ethnopaulisms, which are lexemes used as ethnic slurs to 
describe an out-group in hate speech (Roback 1979; Nuessel 2008; Mullen, 
Calogero & Leader 2007). Such units possess a strong pejorative connotation 
and are often marked as taboo or offensive terms in the dictionaries. According 
to Allen, such words provide linguistic evidence of some ethnic conflict (Allen 
1983).  Idioms that encapsulate stereotypes related to ethnicity do not normally 
contain such lexemes; nevertheless the meaning of the whole idiom can contain 
some judgmental information about a certain out-group which tends to be pejo-
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
88 
rative. Some examples can be found in the phraseological system of the Russian 
language: пьян, как поляк (as drunk as a Pole), незваный гость хуже 
татарина (an uninvited guest is worse than a Tatar). The research exploring 
the English idioms with such enthnonyms as Greek, French, Irish, Chinese, 
Dutch, Indian, Turkish reveals that they often connote negative attitudes to the 
given ethnic groups (Kolshenskaya & Diakova 2015). The analysis of British 
and American idioms shows that similar negative qualities are ascribed to Indi-
ans and the Irish (Archdeacon 1983). The evidence of it can be found with such 
idioms as to get one’s Indian up and to get one’s Irish up that have a similar 
meaning: to become angry or outraged. The investigation of American idioms 
containing stereotypes based on ethnicity carried out by Soboleva shows that the 
out-group is represented in the negative light and is ascribed the following nega-
tive features: violent temper (Indian powwow — a noisy frolic or discussion, to 
get one’s Indian/Dutch/Irish up — to become angry or outraged); bad manners 
(Dutch treat — entertainment in which each person pays for himself, Indian 
gift — a gift that is given and then asked for back); substance abuse (Dutch 
courage —  false courage gained from drinking alcohol, Indian grass —  mariju-
ana); stupidity/clumsiness (to play someone for a Chinaman —  to treat as a 
fool) (Soboleva 2008). 
The derision targeted at other ethnic groups and expressed in the figura-
tive idioms helps to cement the ethnic identity of the in-group and assert its own 
values (Soboleva 2008). Similar observations can be found in the work devoted 
to the idioms containing components Irish, Welsh and Scotch / Scottish authored 
by Kolesova (Kolesova 2019). The scholar assumes that figurative nominations 
with the ethnonym Irish express some negative attitude to this ethnic group, as 
the English used to perceive them as rivals, aggressive and uncultivated. Though 
in the course of time this stereotypical view has undergone some changes, it is 
still preserved in English conventional idioms (Kolesova 2019). 
 
3. Material and Methods  
The research is set in the Critical Discourse Analysis framework which 
aims at disclosing the link between discoursive practices and texts and wider so-
cial and cultural structures, relations and processes (Fairclough 1995). The sam-
ple includes 27 conventional figurative idioms with ethnonymic components 
Dutch / Dutchman, Russian, Greek, Irish, Chinese / Chinaman, Indian, Ethiopi-
an, Mexican, selected from the Oxford Dictionary of Idioms, Macmillan English 
Dictionary and the American Heritage Dictionary. The definition analysis was 
employed to reveal their connotations. In the study ethnonyms are understood as 
nominations of people, belonging to a certain ethnic group (Gerd 2005). The 
next stage of the research was based on the contextual analysis of the sample id-
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
89 
ioms. To this end 143 contexts containing conventional figurative idioms with 
embedded ethnonyms were selected from the Guardian newspaper articles. To 
process the idiomatic meanings the basic principles of the Cognitive Theory of 
Metaphor (CTM) were applied which helped to reveal the metaphoric mapping 
in which the sample idioms are involved.  
 
4. Results and Discussion  
The analysis of the sample idioms semantics shows that these figurative 
items  belong to two categories: connotative and non-connotative. The group of 
idioms that express certain ethnic stereotypes possesses some negative connota-
tion. It can be examplified by the following figurative idioms: Irish lemons — a 
fake copy; Dutch blessing — scolding, Chinese ace — an inept pilot. The pecu-
liarities of out-groups are perceived as odd, unusual and distinctively different 
from the values shared by the ethnic community: Chinese basket — a shot in 
basketball that enters the basket from the bottom of the cylinder before dropping 
back through. If something is incomprehensible or strange, it is called 
китайская грамота in the Russian phraseosystem and the expression to be all 
Greek to someone is used in the English language to convey the same idea.   
However, it is evident that not all idioms with embedded ethnonyms con-
note negative attitudes to a certain ethnic group. Such linguistic items do not 
normally express any heterostereotypes. One of such figurative idioms is Rus-
sian roulette which means an act of reckless bravado. The phrase itself express-
es disapproval of some risky actions, its initial meaning being a stunt in which 
one spins the cylinder of a revolver loaded with only one bullet, aims the muzzle 
at one’s head, and pulls the trigger. The origin of the idiom is presumably relat-
ed to the stunts practiced by Russian officers, but the quality of being reckless is 
not projected to the Russians as an ethnic group. So it is possible to conclude 
that no stereotypes are encoded in this figurative idiom. One more example is 
the expression Can an Ethiopian change his skin or a leopard its spots? It is 
commonly used in its shortened form Can a leopard change its spots? The idi-
om 
originates 
from 
the 
Bible: 
Can an Ethiopian 
change 
his 
skin or a leopard its spots? Neither can you do good who are accustomed to do-
ing evil. The ethnonym Ethiopian is employed for rhetorical purposes to meta-
phorically express the idea of a quality that cannot be alienated from something 
or someone. The skin of an Ethiopian is not treated from the standpoint of its be-
ing good or bad, appropriate or inappropriate, so the ethnonym in the idiom does 
not have any negative connotation.   
The idea of the interdependence of language and culture introduced by 
post-structuralists is widely accepted now (Lotman 2010; Karasik 2013).  The 
norms and values shared by a community at one specific stage of its develop-
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
90 
ment become outdated in the course of time which is reflected in the language. 
The seminal work of Leontovich “The Dynamics of Political Correctness, Inclu-
sive Language and Freedom of Speech” demonstrates how modern social trends 
affect the English language banning the use of offensive terms connected with 
people’s identity. One of the manifestations of political correctness is the 
‘avoidance of stereotypes and false semantic associations’ (Leonto-
vich 2021: 194). It ensues that not only lexemes falling into the category of eth-
nic slur, but also figurative conventional idioms incorporating ethnopaulisms are 
no longer acceptable in public discourse. For example the idiom a nigger in the 
fence / in the woodpile which means a hidden difficulty can hardly be used in 
media discourse as the word nigger is perceived as a racial slur and is usually 
substituted for the euphemism N-word.  
The transformative change in the public perception of linguistic items de-
noting stereotypes is supposed to entail some limitations to the usage of figura-
tive idioms reflecting ethnic stereotypes. The judgmental attitude they express is 
viewed as a type of discrimination, verbal aggression and a lack of tolerance.  
The vexed issue of linguistic racism encompasses the references to the skin col-
our and the person’s ethnicity. Sometimes the interpretation of inclusive lan-
guage goes too far when people try to ban any idiomatic expressions containing 
ethnonyms even though they do not express any stereotypes and are not targeted 
at a specific ethnic group. One of such cases is the idiom Too many chiefs and 
not enough Indians which caused discussion on the Quora platform: “What is a 
non-racist way of saying ‘too many chiefs and not enough Indians’? This phrase 
has been used to describe group dynamics where cooperation is lacking because 
too many participants expect to lead and have others follow”. Those who object 
to the usage of this idiom argue that the term Indian has some reference to the 
times when white Americans conquered the Western territories fighting with na-
tive tribes, so Indian is viewed as a disparaging term that should be substituted 
for the inclusive phrase Native American. At the same time The American Her-
itage Dictionary contains the following usage note:  “However, the acceptance 
of Native American has not brought about the demise of Indian, despite persis-
tent criticism. Unlike Negro, which was quickly stigmatized once black became 
preferred, Indian never fell out of favor with a large segment of the American 
population. The charge that Indian is an offensive term — hopelessly tainted by 
the ignorant or romantic stereotypes of popular American culture — can be an-
swered, at least in part, by pointing to the continuing use of this term among 
American Indians themselves. Indeed, Indian authors and those sympathetic to 
Indian causes often prefer it for its unpretentious familiarity as well as its emo-
tional impact” (American Heritage Dictionary 2000: 832). 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
91 
To trace the modern tendencies in the usage of figurative idioms with em-
bedded ethnonyms we analysed their functioning in British media discourse. To 
this end we examined two types of contexts: the one containing the idioms ex-
pressing ethnic heterostereotypes and the other with non-connotative ethno-
nyms, in other words, idioms with no encoded stereotypes.  
It is important to establish if the figurative meaning of idioms that express 
some negative perception of a certain ethnic group is preserved in the newspaper 
articles. To this end let us consider some contexts with the conventional idiom 
Dutch feast which means a party where the host gets drunk first. 
The idiom Dutch feast expresses quite a dated view on the Dutch and is 
not employed in its figurative meaning in the sample contexts. However, Dutch 
feast is used in its direct meaning in the articles that describe some gastronomic 
experience. The text entitled A Dutch feast for the Queen’s Day describes the 
way two cooking enthusiasts arranged a feast for friends that happened to fall on 
the Netherlands Queen’s Day and so the dishes were orange in colour to fit the 
occasion. When Dutch feast is used in the title, the figurative meaning is the first 
to enter the readers’ minds, it creates some expectations of an event which went 
wrong because of the host’s excessive alcohol consumption. However, the text 
disproves it keeping the readers intrigued. So the idiom serves its pragmatic 
purpose to arrest and retain the readers’ attention, providing the basis for some 
play on direct and metaphorical meanings of the expression. 
The conventional idiom Dutch treat actually means no treat at all as eve-
ryone pays his or her share. The sample contains no examples of the idiom us-
age in this meaning. At the same time it is employed as a pun in the article enti-
tled Norfolk travel tips: Dutch treat with pancakes and real ale in Wells. The 
expression Dutch treat refers to some traditional meals served in the pub located 
onboard the Albatros, the old Dutch clipper. The play on its literal reading and 
figurative meaning serves as a device to rivet the addressees’ attention. It is a 
manifestation of the so called defeated expectancy effect as the first meaning 
that enters the recipients’ minds is figurative, but in fact the story has nothing to 
do with the stinginess of the Dutch. On the contrary, it portrays the romantic at-
mosphere of having a meal on board an old Dutch ship. 
The phrase to go Dutch denotes going out, where a couple each pays for 
their own half of a restaurant bill. It has some negative implication of acting 
“cheap”. The article First dates and the unbearable awkwardness of Going 
Dutch tackles the thorny issue of bill-splitting showing that the man’s request 
for the woman to pay her own way can ruin relationships, no matter how perva-
sive the gender equality ideas are. The expression to go Dutch retains its nega-
tive connotation. However, when it is used in the context, it hardly ever conjures 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
92 
up negative associations with the qualities of the Dutch people since the phrase 
has become a cliché and its etymology is opaque.  
In other contexts different facets of the idiomatic meaning are played on. 
The article Go Dutch? UK and EU may share Netherlands Covid vaccine sup-
plies to ease tensions describes the attempts to share vaccine supplies from 
Dutch AstraZeneca plant, so the idea of sharing limited resources that can be 
beneficial for the UK is emphasized. Applied to the pandemic relief measures 
context the figurative idiom connotes some cooperation and hope.  
Another article has the title Go Dutch and save yourself £50,000 which 
elucidates another aspect of Going Dutch implying that there is nothing bad 
about being economical. It refers to the cases when British students go to the 
Netherlands to earn a university degree, actually without paying any tuition fees. 
The pun employs two meanings: being thrifty and going to a Dutch university.  
The analysis reveals that in media texts idioms, expressing ethnic stereo-
types, are used in some new unexpected light, stimulating the readers’ imagina-
tion, playing on direct and metaphorical meanings. Thus the figurative idioms 
tend to serve rhetorical purposes without compromising the political correctness 
principle. 
The other type of figurative idioms with embedded ethnonyms does not 
express any stereotypes. They include such items as Russian roulette (reckless 
bravado), Mexican wave (an effect resembling a moving wave produced by suc-
cessive sections of the crowd in a stadium standing up, raising their arms, lower-
ing them, and sitting down again), Chinese whisper (a situation in which a piece 
of information is passed from one person to the next and is changed slightly 
each time it is told), too many chiefs and not enough Indians (too 
many managers and not enough people to do the work). 
To explore the way these figurative idioms are used in media discourse 
their contextual meanings and transformations should be analysed. To begin 
with, let us consider the expression too many chiefs and not enough Indians that 
is characterized by bright imagery and has some clear motivation. One of its 
contextual applications refers to the rise and fall of a fashionable London restau-
rant ran by the modern British artist Damien Hirst, who explains the reason for 
the venue’s failure in the following way: There were too many chiefs and not 
enough Indians (The Guardian 18 Sep 2004). The partners running the business 
couldn’t come to agreement, each of them tried to assume the leading role, the 
metaphorical role of a chief. Meanwhile the staff was underpaid and started to 
quit, which resulted in the lack of metaphorical Indians. The metaphor under-
pinning the idiom helps to express complex cause-and-effect relationships in a 
concise and imaginative way. The idiom fits the business management context 
and enhances the pragmatic effect of the text. 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
93 
In another context it is used to describe public services management: 
Wasteful, too many chiefs: five myths about the NHS we need to dispel (The 
Guardian 26 Jan 2016). The title of the article contains a shortened form of the 
idiom. The phrase too many chiefs is employed to describe the popular belief 
about the NHS management that the author aims at puncturing. In this context 
the idiom acquires the new meaning of an inappropriate allocation of resources, 
which seems to be wasteful. The public tends to criticize the disproportionately 
big number of managers in the sphere of health care, rather than the lack of med-
ical practitioners. It accounts for the idiom contraction, as the part not enough 
Indians does not seem relevant for the situation the idiom presents metaphorical-
ly. 
The figurative expression with the ethnonym Indian is also used in media 
discourse to describe sport events when coaches are featured as metaphorical 
chiefs, while athletes are presented as metaphorical Indians. A rugby match is 
analysed in the following way: Lions and Maro Itoje too strong for Maori All 
Blacks on niggly night ... Too many Chiefs missing and not enough good Indians 
(The Guardian 19 Jun 2017). 
In this context the figurative idiom undergoes transformations that can be 
classified as expansion (Pavlina 2017). The insertion of the word missing into 
the first part of the idiom changes the initial meaning of redundancy to the oppo-
site one. It underlines the importance of coaches, whose absence can lead to the 
team’s failure. The second part of the idiom is also augmented. The introduction 
of the adjective good to describe team members shifts the emphasis from their 
quantitative to qualitative parameters.  Thus the transformations of the initial id-
iom create an image that helps the readers to better understand the situation, 
bringing to the surface the factors that prevent rugby teams from achieving top 
results. 
The analysis shows that the figurative idiom fits different contexts devel-
oping some new shades of meaning. So in the media discourse Too many chief 
and not enough Indians can express:  
– The lack of agreement and coordination among managers and their sub-
ordinates’ discontent. 
– Wastefulness, the excessive number of managers. 
– The lack of highly qualified people, managers and subordinates alike. 
To fit a specific context the idioms undergo some transformation, which 
allows for highlighting a certain facet of the metaphorical image. The ethnonym 
embedded in the idiom acquires a symbolic meaning, and the link with the nom-
ination of an ethnic community is quite opaque.  
The pragmatic effect is enhanced considerably when two idioms with eth-
nonyms are juxtaposed in one sentence as is the case with the following news-
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
94 
paper article title: Playing Russian roulette with a Mexican wave of capital 
crimes (The Guardian 7 December 2014). According to Macmillan Dictionary 
blog, the idiom “Mexican wave is a descriptive phrase that is derived from the 
motion of spectators who participate in the exercise of moving in near unison 
like an ocean wave. Most sports historians agree that it first came to internation-
al sport during the 1986 World Cup, which was held in Mexico”. When the 
movements of spectators at a stadium are compared to the movements of water, 
some metaphorical representation of reality takes place. In the context Playing 
Russian roulette with a Mexican wave of capital crimes the movement of specta-
tors that underpins the idiomatic image serves as a source of a new metaphor. It 
is employed to describe the situation when something causes the effect which is 
unstoppable, giving a new name to the thing that is usually called the domino 
effect. The idiom Mexican wave does not have any evaluative meaning. Howev-
er, in the context it connotes something undesirable and destructive as the lin-
guistic items Russian roulette and crimes used in the same sentence have a nega-
tive connotation which is projected onto the figurative idiom Mexican wave. 
This example shows that being figurative nominations idioms with embedded 
ethnonyms are involved in metaphorical mapping and serve as source domains 
for new metaphors. The ethnonym Mexican does not express any biased percep-
tion of the ethnic group. Now the movements of spectators during football 
matches resembling waves are common across the globe and their idiomatic rep-
resentation does not seem to have any clear connection with Mexicans as an 
ethnic group. It shows that the current usage of the figurative idiom is not af-
fected by the “etymological memory” of this linguistic unit. 
 
5. Concluding remarks 
Summarising the result of the analysis, it is possible to say that idioms 
containing ethnonymic nominations with some pejorative connotation are 
banned from the media discourse as they violate the principle of inclusiveness. 
At the same time conventional figurative expressions with embedded ethnonyms 
that denote heterostereotypes about certain ethnic groups are used in newspaper 
articles as sources of pun. The journalists play on their direct and metaphorical 
meanings creating the so called defeated expectancy effect. One more group of 
idioms with ethnonyms does not contain any evaluation of an ethnic group, ini-
tially being non-connotative. When used in the contexts they undergo some 
transformations and develop new meanings, the reference to a specific ethnic 
group becomes opaque. The figurative idioms containing ethnonyms are in-
volved in metaphorical mapping, serving as source domains for new images. It 
is possible to conclude that the employment of conventional figurative idioms 
with embedded ethnonyms in media discourse is a powerful rhetorical tool 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
95 
which helps to affect the readers’ perception and convey the message in a lacon-
ic and expressive way without violating the rules of political correctness and in-
clusiveness. 
 
Спиcок литературы / References 
 
Герд А. С. Введение в этнолингвистику.  СПб. : Изд-во С.-Петерб. ун-та, 2005. [Gerd, 
Alexandr S. (2005) Vvedeniye v etnolingvistiku (Introduction to Ethnolingustics). Saint 
Petersburg: Saint Petersburg university Publishing (In Russian)]. 
Горохова А. М. К вопросу о моделировании ядерных и периферийных компонентов 
британского национального характера (на материале паремиологического фонда 
английского языка) // Вестник НГЛУ. 2016. № 35. С. 11–23. [Gorokhova, Anna M. 
(2016) K voprosy o modelirovanii yadernykh I periferiynikh komponentov bri-
tanskogo natsionalnogo haraktera (na materiale paremiologicheskogo fonda an-
gliyskogo yazyka) (Towards Modeling Nuclear and Peripheral Components of the 
British National Character (Based on the Analysis of the English Language Paremio-
logical Fund). LUNN Bulletin, 35, 11–23. (In Russian)]. 
Горохова А. М. Паремио-семантическое картирование конструкта «свободолюбие» бри-
танского национального характера (на материале паремиологического фонда ан-
глийского языка) // Вестник НГЛУ. 2017. № 38. С. 53–61. [Gorokhova, Anna M. 
(2017) Paremio-semanticheskoe kartirovaniye konstrukta “svobodolubiye” bri-
tanskogo natsionalnogo haraktera (na materiale paremiologicheskogo fonda an-
gliyskogo yazyka) (Paremio-semantic Mapping of the British National Identity Con-
struct “Freedom” (Based on the Analysis of the English Paremiological Fund)). LUNN 
Bulletin, 38, 53–61. (In Russian)]. 
Леонтович О. А. Политическая  корректность,  инклюзивный  язык  и  свобода  слова: 
динамика  понятий // Russian  Journal  of  Linguistics.  2021.  Т.  25.  № 1.  С.  194–
220.  DOI: 10.22363/2687-0088-2021-25-1-194-220 [Leontovich, Olga  A.  (2021) 
Politichesjaya korrektnost’, inclyuzivnyi yazyk I svoboda slova: dinamika poniatii 
(The  Dynamics  of  Political  Correctness,  Inclusive  Language  and Freedom of 
Speech). Russian Journal of Linguistics, 25 (1), 194–220. DOI: 10.22363/2687-0088-
2021-25-1-194-220 (In Russian)]. 
Лотман Ю. М. Непредсказуемые механизмы культуры. Таллинн: TLU Press, 2010. 
[Lotman, Yuryi M. (2010) Nepredskazuiemyie mehanizmy kultury (Unpredictable 
Mechanisms of Culture). Tallin: TLU Press. (In Russian)]. 
Карасик В. И. Языковая матрица культуры. М.: Гнозис, 2013 [Karasik, Vladimir I. (2013) 
Yazykovaya matrica kultury (Language Matrix of Culture). Moscow: Gnozis. (In Rus-
sian)]. 
Ковшова М. Л. Линговокультурологический метод во фразеологии: Коды культуры. М.: 
ЛЕНАНД, 2016. [Kovshova, Mariya L. (2016) Lingvokulturologicheskiy metod vo 
frazeologii: Kodi kulturi (Linguocultural Method in Phraseology: Codes of Culture). 
Moscow: Lenand. (In Russian)]. 
Колесова К. В. Особенности коннотативных значений номинативных единиц, обозна-
чающих этносы Великобритании // Вестник НГЛУ. 2019. № 45. С. 28–35. [Kole-
sova, Kira V. (2019)  Osobennosti konnotativnih znachenii nominativnih edinits oboz-
nachayushih etnosy Velikobritanii (Connotational Peculiarities of Ethnic Nominations 
within the UK). LUNN Bulletin, 45, 28–35. (In Russian)]. 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
96 
Колшенская Е. С., Дьякова А. А. Этнонимосодержащие фразеологизмы и этнические 
гетеростереотипы в контексте взаимосвязи языка и культуры [Электронный ре-
сурс] // Гуманитарные научные исследования: электронный научный журнал 
2015. № 4 (1). URL: https://human.snauka.ru/2015/04/10613 (дата обращения: 
01.08.2021). [Kolshenskaya, Ekaterina S., Diakova, Anastasiya A. (2015) (2021, Au-
gust 01) Etnonimosoderzashiye frazeologizmi i etnicheskiye stereotipi v kontekste 
vzaimodeistviya yazyka i kuluri (Idioms with Ethnonyms and Ethnic Heterostereo-
types in the Context of Language and Culture Interrelation). Electronic scientific & 
practical journal “Humanities scientific researches”, 4 (1). Retrieved from 
https://human.snauka.ru/2015/04/10613 (In Russian)]. 
Кочетков В. В. Психология межкультурных различий. М.: ПЕР СЭ, 2002. [Kochetkov, 
Vladimir V. (2002) Psihologiya mezhkulturnykh razlichiy (Cultural Differences Psy-
chology). Moscow: Per Se. (In Russian)]. 
Павлина С. Ю. Вариативность фразеологизмов и их модификации в англоязычном по-
литическом дискурсе // Вестник НГЛУ. 2017. № 37. C. 63–71. [Pavlina, Svetlana 
Yu. (2017) Variativnost’ frazeologizmov i ih modifikatsii v angloyazychnom politich-
eskom discurse (Variations and Modifications of Idioms in British and American Po-
litical Discourse). LUNN Bulletin, 37, 67–71. (In Russian)]. 
Павлина С. Ю. Экспликация национальных стереотипов в британском медиадискурсе // 
Иностранные языки в аспекте межкультурной коммуникации: материалы докла-
дов X Международной конференции. Саратов: Саратовский источник, 2018.      
C. 185–190. [Pavlina, Svetlana Yu. (2018) Eksplikatsiya natsional’nykh stereotipov v 
britanskom mediadiskurse (National Stereotypes Explication in British Media Dis-
course). Inostrannye yazyki v aspekte mezhkul’turnoy kommunikatsii: materialy 
dokladov X Mezhdunarodnoy konferentsii (Foreign Languages from the Intercultural 
Communication Perspective: X International conference proceedings). Saratov: Sara-
tovskiy istochnik, 185–190. (In Russian)]. 
Соболева Е. Ю. Образ чужого во фразеологизмах американского варианта английского 
языка с компонентом этнонимом //  Вестник Нижегородского университета им. 
Н. И. Лобачевского. 2008. № 6. 274–277. [Soboleva, Ekaterina Yu. (2008) Obraz 
chuzhogo vo frazeolizmah amerikanskogo varianta anglijskogo yazuka s komponen-
tom etnonimom (The Image of a Stranger in American Phraseologisms with an Ethno-
nymic Component).Vestnik of Lobachevsky  State University of Nizhni Novgorod, 6, 
274–277. (In Russian)]. 
Телия В. Н. Культурно-национальные коннотации фразеологизмов (от мировидения к 
пониманию) // Славянское языкознание. XI Международный съезд славистов. 
М.: Наука, 1993. C. 302–314. [Teliya, Veronica N. (1993) Kul’turno-natsional’nye 
konnotacii frazeologizmov (ot mirovideniya k ponimaniyu) (Culture-specific Connota-
tions of Phraseologysms (from World View Shaping to Understanding)). Slavyanskoe 
yazykoznanie. XI Mezhdunarodny syezd slavistov (Slavic Studies. XI International 
Slavistic Congress). Moscow: Nauka, 302–314. (In Russian)]. 
Телия  В. Н. Русская фразеология: семантический, прагматический и лингвокультуроло-
гический аспекты. М.: Языки русской культуры, 1996. [Teliya, Veronika N. (1996) 
Russkaya frazeologiya: semanticheskij, pragmaticheskij i lingvokulturologicheskij 
aspekty (Russian Phraseology: Semantic, Pragmatic and Linguokultural Aspects). 
Moscow: Yazyki russkoy kultury. (In Russian)]. 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
97 
Шастина И. А. Aктуализация опыта говорящего и реализация его коммуникативного 
намерения в формировании значений этнонимов китайцев и японцев // Лингви-
стические парадигмы и лингводидактика: материалы XIII международной кон-
ференции. Иркутск: Изд-во ИГЛУ, 2008. C. 293–307. [Shastina, Irina A. (2008) 
Aktualizaciya opyta govoryaschego i realizaciya ego kommunikativnogo namereniya 
v formirovanii znachenij etnonimov kitaicev i yaponcev (The Speaker’s Experience 
Actualization and His Communicative Intention Realization in Forming Chinese and 
Japanese Ethnonymic Meanings). Lingvisticheskie paradigmy i lingvodidaktika: mate-
rialy XIII mezhdunarodnoy konferentsii (Linguistic Paradigms and Linguodidactics: 
XIII International Conference Proceedings). Irkutsk: Izd-vo IGLU, 293–307. (In Rus-
sian)]. 
Allen, Irving L. (1983) The Language of Ethnic Conflict: Social Organization and Lexical 
Culture. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Archdeacon, Thomas J. (1983) Becoming American: an Ethnic History. N.Y.: The Free Press. 
Boyadzhieva, Ellie. (2010) (2021, August 14) Reflections of Social Stereotypes in Modern 
Bulgarian and English Phraseology. In TRANS. Internet-Zeitschrift für Kulturwissen-
schafte. Retrieved from http://www.inst.at/trans/17Nr/2-12/2-12_boyadzhieva17.htm.   
Chesnokova, Olga S., Marija Radović. (2020) Demonyms in the Pacific Alliance Countries: 
Morphological and Semantic Variation. Russian Journal of Linguistics, 24 (4), 1017–
1048. DOI: 10.22363/2687-0088-2020-24-4-1017-1048 
Dobrovol’skiy, Dmitriy, Piirainen, Elisabeth. (2006) Cultural Knowledge and Idioms. Inter-
national Journal of English Studies, 6 (1), 27–41.  
Grünthal, Riho M. V. (1999) Analyzing the Finnic Ethnonyms. Folia Uralica 
Debreceniensia, 6, 39–56. 
Fairclough, Norman. (1995) Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Longman. 
Koopman, Adrian. (2016) Ethnonyms. The Oxford Handbook of Names and Naming / Ed. 
Carole Hough. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 251–262. 
Mullen, Brian, Calogero, Rachel M., Leader, Tirza I. (2007) A Social Psychological Study of 
Ethnonyms: Cognitive Representation of the In-group and Intergroup Hostili-
ty. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92 (4), 612–
630. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.92.4.612 
Nuessel, Frank. (2008) A Note on Ethnophaulisms and Hate Speech. Names, 56:1, 29–
31, DOI: 10.1179/175622708X282929. 
Raina, Olga V., Shestakova-Stuk, Alena S. (2019) Ethnic Stereotypes in Polish and Czech 
Proverbs. Bohemistyka, 1, 19–32. https://doi.org/10.14746/bo.2019.1.2 
Roback, Abraham. (1944) Dictionary of Ethnic Slurs (Ethnophaulisms). Cambridge, MA: Sci-
art Publishers [reprinted in 1979 by Maledicta Press, Waukesha, WI]. 
 
Словари / Dictionaries 
 
American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language. Forth Edition. Houghton Mifflin, 
2000. 
Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners. Oxford, 2002.  
Oxford Dictionary of Idioms. Second Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. 
 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 3 (55). Язык и культура 
 
98 
Источники языкового материала / Language material resources 
 
The Guardian (2021, August 15). Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/international. 
Quora (2021, August 10). Retrieved from https://www.quora.com/What-is-a-non-racist-way-
of-saying-too-many-chiefs-and-not-enough-Indians. 
Macmillan 
dictionary 
blog 
(2021, 
August 
11). 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.macmillandictionaryblog.com/mexican-wave. 
 
 
 
