Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 5
87
 Leontovich O.A., Kotelnikova N.N., 2021
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ

www.volsu.ru
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.5.7
UDC 81’42:003.074 
Submitted: 22.03.2020
LBC 81.055.51.3 
Accepted: 07.06.2021
THE NATURE OF CHINESE AND RUSSIAN SUBCULTURES 
IN URBAN DISCOURSE 1
Olga A. Leontovich 
Volgograd State Socio-Pedagogical University, Volgograd, Russia; 
Tianjin Foreign Studies University, Tianjin, China
Nadezhda N. Kotelnikova
Volgograd State Socio-Pedagogical University, Volgograd, Russia
Abstract. The paper seeks to examine the communicative aspect of modern Chinese and Russian urban 
subcultures. The nominations of urban social groups representing young people in Russia and China and their 
connection to modern communication practices are viewed from the perspective of urban communication studies, 
which provides an opportunity for a new comprehension of issues connected with verbal and nonverbal constituents 
of urban discourse. The indicates that the subcultures in the Russian urban landscape are reflected in such nominations 
as фрики (freaki), мажоры (majory), хипстеры (hipstery), брейк-дансеры (break-dancery), байкеры (bikery), etc. 
The Chinese subcultures are known under such names as shamate, xiaoqingxin, tuyayawenhua, erciyuanyawenhua, 
egaoyawenhua and many others. We argue that in both countries the unity of social subgroups is based not so much 
on ideological preferences, but rather on lifestyles, hobbies and interests, many of them formed under the Western 
influence. The subcultures discussed in the research represent a broad panorama of Chinese and Russian social life. 
They reflect the sociocultural dynamics of attitudes, values and lifestyles influenced by globalization but acquiring 
nationally specific features, which transform them into unique sociocultural phenomena.
Key words: subcultures, nominations, China, Russia, urban communication studies.
Citation. Leontovich O.A., Kotelnikova N.N. The Nature of Chinese and Russian Subcultures in Urban 
Discourse. Vestnik Volgogradskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2. Yazykoznanie [Science  Journal 
of  Volgograd  State  University. Linguistics], 2021, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 87-96. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/
jvolsu2.2021.5.7
УДК 81’42:003.074 
Дата поступления статьи: 22.03.2020
ББК 81.055.51.3 
Дата принятия статьи: 07.06.2021
КИТАЙСКИЕ И РОССИЙСКИЕ СУБКУЛЬТУРЫ 
В КОНТЕКСТЕ МЕДИАУРБАНИСТИЧЕСКОГО ДИСКУРСА 1
Ольга Аркадьевна Леонтович
Волгоградский государственный социально-педагогический университет, г. Волгоград, Россия; 
Тяньцзиньский университет иностранных языков, г. Тяньцзинь, Китай
Надежда Николаевна Котельникова
Волгоградский государственный социально-педагогический университет, г. Волгоград, Россия
Аннотация. Статья посвящена изучению современных китайских и российских субкультур в ком-
муникативном аспекте. Номинации молодежных социальных групп в китайских и российских городах, а 
также связанные с ними коммуникативные тактики рассмотрены с позиций медиаурбанистики, что дает 
возможность по-новому осмыслить проблемы структуры городского дискурса – соотношение его вербаль-
ной и невербальной составляющих. Выявлено, что российские субкультуры отражены в таких номинациях, 
как фрики, мажоры, хипстеры, брейк-дансеры, байкеры и т. д.; китайские, в свою очередь, известны под 
такими названиями, как 杀马特 shamate, 小清新 xiaoqingxin, 涂鸦亚文化 tuyayawenhua, 二次元亚文化 
erciyuanyawenhua, 恶搞亚文化 egaoyawenhua и др. Установлено, что в обеих странах единство социальных 
88
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 5
групп определяется не столько идеологическими факторами, сколько стилем жизни, увлечениями и инте-
ресами, многие из которых сформированы под влиянием Запада. Обсуждаемые субкультуры представляют 
широкую панораму жизни большого города в России и КНР. В них отражается динамика менталитетов, цен-
ностей и образа жизни, складывающихся в условиях глобализации, но обретающих национально-специфические 
черты, трансформирующие их в уникальные социокультурные сообщества. 
Ключевые слова: субкультуры, номинации, Китай, Россия, медиаурбанистика.
Цитирование. Леонтович О. А., Котельникова Н. Н. Китайские и российские субкультуры в контек-
сте медиаурбанистического дискурса // Вестник Волгоградского государственного университета. Серия 2, 
Языкознание. – 2021. – Т. 20, № 5. – С. 87–96. – (На англ. яз.). – DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.5.7
Introduction
The pulsating rhythm of urban life, its 
polyphony and diversity which are nowadays 
experienced by over half of humankind, define 
the key principles and strategies of human 
interaction, power relations and tendencies of 
social development. This enhances the significance 
of urban studies carried out in different fields 
of knowledge, such as architecture, sociology, 
political science, economics, communication 
studies, linguistics, etc. There is a great increase 
of the volume of publications, conferences 
and symposiums tackling the nature and 
contextualization of urban discourse.
The purpose of this paper, which constitutes 
part of a broader investigation entitled “Language 
of a Big City: Media Urban Discourse in Russia 
and China” and supported by the Russian 
Foundation for Basic Research, is to examine the 
communicative aspect of modern Chinese and 
Russian urban subcultures.
Theoretical background 
and research methods
The study draws from a number of theories 
dealing with urban life and represented in 
the works by Simmel [1903/1950], Weber 
[1922/1978; 1923/1966], Mellor [1977], etc. (see 
a detailed review in: [Encyclopedia of Urban 
Studies, 2010; Kvyat, 2014; Parker, 2015]). 
The founders of Russian urban studies termed 
as gorodovedeniye or gradovedeniye are the 
historians Grevs and Antsiferov (as cited in: 
[Yunakovskaya, 2011]).
Modern authors are trying to give new 
interpretations of the concepts city and the urban 
taking into account the realities and rhythms 
of contemporary life. Aiello and Tosoni [2016, 
p. 1253] differentiate between city as context, city 
as medium and city as content, the combination of 
which constitutes a city as a source and product 
of interactions, practices and narratives. Scholars 
believe that the term the urban embodies social 
practices, networks and patterns of interpersonal 
and intergroup communication. The new times 
are marked by the emergence of such notions 
as creative cities and smart cities [Aurigi, 2005, 
2012; Pratt, 2011]. The proponents of the so called 
new urbanism promote the ideas of the creation 
of open urban space, context architecture, green 
zones, reasonable balance between office and 
residential buildings, reduction of transportation 
flows, preservation of historical buildings, etc. 
(for example see: [The Charter of the New 
Urbanism]). 
The urban landscape is traditionally understood 
as a physical environment – houses, streets, squares, 
engineering constructions, etc. A different approach 
is suggested by Lefebvre [1991] who interprets a 
city as a live organism and indicates that space is 
not anything given by nature and permanent but 
constantly developing and reproduced on the basis 
of social change. He delineates physical, mental and 
social space and writes about multiple definitions 
of space – geographical, economic, demographic, 
sociological, political, etc. Contemplating the role 
of language in an urban landscape, Lefebvre poses 
the following questions: does language logically, 
epistemologically and genetically precede the 
construction of social space or is it its product? How 
is space read and decoded? The author comes to the 
conclusion that space is a sort of surcodage, code des 
codes (code of codes) [Lefebvre, 1991, pp. 20-27].
Lefebvre’s definitions applied to urban 
communicative space can act as a foundation 
for investigating it from different perspectives, 
such as the territorial organization of space, its 
configuration, road networks, correlation between 
the city centre and peripheries, built and unbuilt 
urban space, division into communities as a result of 
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 5
89
O.A. Leontovich, N.N. Kotelnikova. The Nature of Chinese and Russian Subcultures in Urban Discourse
social segregation, special distribution of languages 
and sociolects, philosophy of environmental 
conservation, etc. [Leontovich, 2020].
The application of the notion border to urban 
society allows scholars to research the boundaries 
between communities, languages, dialects, 
cultures and subcultures, (im)possibility of 
crossing them and the connection between space 
and identity. The notion of space is also related 
to the problems of (in)equality, existence of poor 
and rich housing, prestigious and unprestigious 
areas, as well as the controversial character of 
urban space [Leontovich, 2020; Tarantino, Tosoni, 
2013]. The investigation of a big city from the 
perspective of media urban studies provides an 
opportunity of a new comprehension of issues 
connected with verbal and nonverbal constituents 
of urban discourse.
Our research is based on the principles 
of critical discourse analysis, narratology, 
semiotics and urban communication studies 
which have been fruitfully applied to the study of 
different aspects of urban discourse [Bakumova, 
Kotelnikova, 2019; Chen, Leontovich, 2020; 
Kotelnikova, 2019; Leontovich, 2018; 2020], 
such as historical memories and their reflection 
in the urban landscape, the correlation between 
public discourse and the citizen’s private life, 
social advertising as a reflection of universal and 
culturally specific values, ethnic, cultural and 
linguistic diversity of urban communication, new 
urban communicative practices, the reflection of 
the COVID-19 pandemic in Russian and Chinese 
media urban discourse, etc.
The present paper discusses the new 
nominations of urban social groups representing 
young people in Russia and China and 
their connection to modern communication 
practices. The research employs the methods 
of definition analysis, discourse analysis, 
semiotic analysis and contextual analysis. We 
argue that in both countries, the unity of social 
subgroups is based not so much on ideological 
preferences, but rather on lifestyles, hobbies 
and interests, many of them formed under the 
Western influence.
Discussion
A high degree of diversification typical 
of a big city accounts for the emergence of 
new social groups and is reflected in language 
in the form of a broad semantic class of words 
nominating social groups. It is developed on the 
basis of numerous differential elements such as 
age, gender, profession, ethnicity, etc. The city 
is interpreted as a real and abstract (imagined) 
community (e.g. citizens, city authorities, 
creative elite). The interaction in an urban context 
happens on the level of interpersonal and group 
communication, as well as between an individual 
and urban community, city administration, mass 
media and so on.
On the one hand, the image of a city is formed 
on the basis of its citizens’ collective identity; 
on the other hand, the city influences peoples’ 
individual identity defining them as inhabitants 
of Moscow, Volgograd, Beijing, Tianjin, etc. 
Social advertising can act as a significant visual 
factor affecting the citizens’ mind and expressing 
universal and culturally specific values. Every 
city is characterized by the existence of certain 
communication patterns and networks typical 
of local urban communities (districts, yards 
and youth groups); fluctuation between various 
language codes and repertoires; different forms 
of urban activism and the contribution of urban 
practices to the formation of different subcultures. 
Subcultures have been analysed from different 
perspectives [Fine, Kleinman, 1979; Hall, Jefferson, 
2006; etc.]. The common approach among Russian 
scholars [Gurevich, 1998; Levikova, 2007; 
Omelchenko, 2000; Sikevich, 1990] is to view 
them as part of national culture, with their own 
systems of values, norms, customs, traditions, 
behavior and lifestyle. Chinese researchers give 
similar definitions to the notion of ‘subculture’ 
(亚文化) but emphasise that it is an alternative 
to dominant culture displaying some deviations 
from it without denying its essence [高丙中, 1997, 
p. 113; 许苏民, 1990, p. 145].
In contemporary society, there is a tendency 
to view subcultures not as integral ways of living 
and mindsets, but rather recreational practices and 
virtual communities [Galushina, 2016, c. 134]. 
If a while ago it was common to belong to one 
subculture, nowadays it is normal to be part of 
several subcultures at a time, which means that 
the notion of subculture has been replaced by 
a ‘cultural mix’. The ‘post-subcultural theory’ 
accommodates the “increasing fragmentation 
of youth style since the 1980s” [Bennett, Kahn-
90
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 5
Harris, 2004, p. 2] and the specifics of the 
postmodern state of society and culture. According 
to this approach, the hard and fast lines between 
subcultural divisions have dissolved and identity 
has become less outwardly apparent [Bennett, 
Kahn-Harris, 2004, p. 2]. The elements of 
different styles are mixed and modern subcultural 
identity does not replace but rather supplements 
mainstream social existence. 
Bakumova and Kotelnikova [2019] have 
described a number of new nominations of Chinese 
subcultures reflecting modern trends in society. 
They are predominantly formed with the help of a 
highly productive suffix morpheme 族 of Japanese 
origin, which denotes a group of people united by a 
general characteristic or activity [王晓静, 2010; 
肖遥遥, 2009]. The neologisms based on the 
«Х 族» pattern often include borrowed elements, 
which testifies to the influence of globalization 
processes in Chinese society. A good example is 
the word 辣奢族, the initial component of which 
is 辣奢 lashe – a phonetic calque from the English 
word ‘luxury’. The lexeme 辣奢族 is used to 
denote young people born in the 1980s – 90s, 
mostly with a good income, who strive to live a 
life of luxury and are trying to emphasise their 
social status by means of different accessories. 
Their consumerism is based on the obsession 
with fashionable brands, even if it contradicts 
common sense. Other examples in this group 
of nominations are: 乐活族 lashezu (people 
leading a healthy lifestyle) stemming from the 
English abbreviation LOHAS (lifestyle of health 
and sustainability); 尼特族 nitezu (a ‘no-no 
generation’ – young people who don’t work or 
study) derived from the English acronym NEET 
(Not in Employment, Education or Training); 
飞特族 feitezu (so called ‘free workers’ – young 
people who do not have a permanent job and live 
on occasional earnings) based on the combination 
of the English word free and German arbeiter 
[Bakumova, Kotelnikova, 2019; 肖遥遥, 2009; 
王思妮, 2010; 流响, 2014].
A very different social group is 蚁族 yizu 
(‘ant tribe’) applied to young people in their 
twenties, recent university graduates, mostly 
from agricultural areas or smaller cities who 
come to Chinese megacities in order to climb the 
social ladder [赵声馗, 2014]. Because of their 
low income, they have to live in apartments with 
numerous lodgers or in old barracks divided into 
tiny rooms at the outskirts. From every point 
of view, they remind ants: they are intelligent, 
hard-working and live in colonies [Bakumova, 
Kotelnikova, 2019; Wu Yao, 2017].
The name of another social group that has 
been rapidly growing is 月光族 yueguangzu 
(from 月 – month; 光 – completely, to the last 
bit) – a collective nomination for those who 
spend their monthly income to the last mao. Their 
characteristic feature is not so much the their low 
income but rather inability to spend their money 
wisely. This social group is mostly composed of 
people who grew up without brothers or sisters 
under the one-child policy, representative of the 
generation of ‘little emperors’, consumers living 
under the slogan: “赚多少花多少” (Spend as 
much as you have earned) and differ a lot from 
the older generation of the Chinese who are very 
frugal and tend to save money. Another neologism 
that is acquiring popularity is 月欠族 (月 – month; 
欠 – lack, owe), used to denote people who 
cannot control their spendings, and use online 
banking to borrow more money that they can earn 
[Bakumova, Kotelnikova, 2019; 张洪涛, 2019; 
“月光族”..., 2019].
The high cost of living in megacities has 
produced a social group called 钟摆族 zhongbaizu 
(‘pendulums’). These are commuters who work 
in central parts of the city but choose to buy 
apartments in the outskirts of the city or beyond. 
The use of the metaphorical image of a pendulum 
reflects the peculiarities of their life [曾丹, 2010]. 
China possesses a well developed transportation 
system, including high-speed railway lines, which 
contributes to the growth of this social group. All 
those terms which originated in the internet have 
become widely used due to mass media. 
Both Russian and Chinese megacities 
are huge sites which provide young people 
with broad opportunities of self-realization 
and an endless potential for the formation and 
development of youth subcultures. As was 
mentioned above, the consolidating factors are 
lifestyles, hobbies, interests, etc, rather than 
ideological preferences. What we could observe 
during our study was that this landscape is 
extremely dynamic and rapidly changes: what 
used to be seen as fashionable yesterday, is no 
longer perceived as such. The study also shows 
the fluidity of new subcultures and a lack of 
distinct boundaries between them.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 5
91
O.A. Leontovich, N.N. Kotelnikova. The Nature of Chinese and Russian Subcultures in Urban Discourse
The subcultures in the Russian urban 
landscape are reflected in such nominations as 
фрики (freaki), мажоры (majory), рейверы 
(ravery), хипстеры (hipstery), хип-хоперы (hip-
hoppery), брейк-дансеры (break-dancery), бай-
керы (bikery), панки (punki), рэперы (rappery), 
футбольные фанаты (football fanaty), экологи-
сты (ecologisty), ролевики (roleviki), толкиени-
сты (tolkienisty), ЭМО (EMO), аниме (anime), 
готы (gothy), сатанисты (satanisty), etc., most 
of them evidently stemming from corresponding 
English words and Western communication 
practices connected with street art, graffiti and role 
quests. In many instances they acquire culturally 
specific features induced by the Russian urban 
environment. For example, in the 1950s hipster 
subculture associated with alternative fashion, 
art, music and films, was adopted in Russia in the 
form of stilyagi and revived after the release of 
the 2008 cult film with this title. 
Specifically Russian communication 
practices are reconstructions of historical events, 
‘posidelki’, ‘kvartirniki’ and ‘anti-cafés’ (see also: 
[Kvyat, 2013; Leontovich, 2019]). 
Some of the subcultures mentioned above, 
such as hip-hoppers and break-dancers, are to a 
certain extent represented in the Chinese urban 
landscape. In most cases they are, however, 
transformed under the influence of the Chinese 
social context. For example, the Chinese 
counterpart of hipster subculture is 文艺青年
wenyiqingnian (lit. ‘cultured young people’, or 
‘art-loving young people’). 
A subculture similar to freaks is 杀马特
shamate, which emerged in China at the dawn of 
the 21st century. The nomination stems from the 
English word smart and denotes young people 
aged from 16 to 25 years old with basic secondary 
general or technical school education, coming 
from rural areas to big cities in order to earn 
money. Unlike earlier migrants, they are not ready 
for hard physical labour on construction sites 
and are happy to find low-paid jobs at factories, 
hairdressers, grocery stores and delivery services. 
They are conspicuous because of their flamboyant 
style, bleached or brightly dyed and teased hair, 
with lots of hairspray, bright make-up, nails and 
piercing, unusual loud clothes and plenty of 
accessories. The shamate subculture has been 
largely influenced by western informal trends, 
but, unlike them, is devoid of the rebellious spirit 
and denial; their only wish is to attract attention 
by their unconventionality and extravagance. 
They are eager to capture their bright appearance 
by taking selfies and posting them on closed 
chats of the Chinese QQ messenger where they 
communicate with other subculture members. 
This is the most disliked and scorned subculture 
in China ridiculed in real life and on the Internet. 
They do not want to go back to their villages but 
cannot find their place in the city. Shamate are 
young provincials without any financial or social 
support who, on the one hand, strive for self-
realization and want to attract attention by their 
appearance and, on the other, want to be accepted 
by the urban community [王福帅, 杨阳, 2014; 
Kotelnikova, 2019].
Shamate subculture is usually juxtaposed to 
小清新亚文化 xiaoqingxin subculture. The term 
小清新 is composed of the words 小 (small) and 
清新 (fresh). It has been influenced by the indi-
pop music and the works by the female Chinese 
novelist Li Jie, who publishes on the Internet 
under the pen-name 安妮宝贝 Anni Baobei and 
is extremely popular among young people. The 
representatives of the xiaoqingxin subculture are 
predominantly young educated women from well-
to-do families with versatile interests, exquisite 
tastes and positive world perception. They enjoy 
artwork, travelling alone, certain tastes in music 
and cinema. They like a certain style in clothes 
(long linen skirts, checkered shirts, canvas shoes 
and absence of bright make-up). An important 
accessory is a LOMO camera – photography is 
an important form of self-expression which gives 
them an opportunity to capture the beauty of the 
world, find magic in mundane existence and share 
their thoughts and feelings. They usually have 
their personal pages and blogs in social networks 
where they publish their photographs and literary 
essays. Xiaoqingxin are romantic dreamers 
who oppose themselves to mainstream culture. 
However, due to the attention of mass media and 
public approval, this subculture has become so 
popular and has acquired so many imitators 
that it runs the risk of becoming mainstream 
itself [刘黎黎, 2013, pp. 72-73].
二 次 元 亚 文 化  erciyuan yawenhua 
(2D subculture) unites the admirers of two-
dimensional animation and computer games in 
the Japanese style anime comics. In Russia this 
subculture is often called by the Japanese word 
92
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 5
otaku. The word 御宅族 yuzhaizu is actively 
used in Chinese, however, it is applied to young 
people who live a lonely life, avoid real contacts 
and spend all their free time on the internet [谯燕, 
2012, p. 5]. The literal translation of the word 
otaku is ‘your home’, so its etymology explains 
this usage. Undoubtedly, the representatives of 
the 2D subculture include people who can be 
called otaku, but the 2D subculture itself does not 
presuppose confinement and a secluded life style. 
It has plenty of followers in China – 153 million 
fans (二次元迷), each of them spending around 
1700 yuans a year on goods connected with anime, 
which gives a strong impulse to the development 
of 2D industry. According to the statistical 
information published by the Chinese biggest media 
platform “Sina Weibo” (新浪微博), the age of the 
2D fans is very diverse. The representatives of 
this subculture have no common ideology – they 
are just interested in certain media products. They 
are also characterized by the use of a common 
slang – mostly words borrowed from Japanese and 
usually emotionally coloured. The representatives 
of the 2D subculture hold numerous events 
which provide broad opportunities for offline 
communication: anime-festivals, exhibitions, 
thematic parties, etc. Some of them are held 
on an amazingly huge scale. For example, 
in 2017 “The Chinese International Anime 
Festival” annually held in Hangzhou city, united 
participants from 82 countries of the world. 
During six days the festival was attended by over 
1.39 million people [139 万..., 2017]. One of 
the new communication practices associated 
with 2D subculture is 动漫角色扮演 – cosplay 
(abbreviated from ‘costume play’) – a game in 
which anime and computer game characters are 
personified not only through their appearance but 
also their behaviour, manner of speech, phrases 
and gestures. Some of the representatives of 2D 
subculture copy their favourite characters not only 
in cosplay, but also in everyday life. 
Graffiti subculture is popular both in Russia 
and China. It is formed by graffiti writers whose 
solidarity is based on their interest for wall art 
and the desire to express an idea or produce an 
emotional response in the spectators with the help 
of compositions painted on urban constructions. 
The Russian graffiti movement which originated 
in the USSR in the 1980s, acquired mass character 
by the late 1990s and is still on the rise. It is 
interesting to note that the annually held street art 
festival bears the name “SNICKERS URБАNиЯ”; 
its unusual spelling being an example of creative 
language use.
In China the representatives of graffiti 
subculture (涂鸦亚文化 tuya yawenhua) are 
not so numerous as some others, however, their 
artistic activities have a great influence on the 
image of Chinese cities. The Chinese version of 
subculture emerged in Beijing in 1996 after the 
penetration of hip-hop to China and at first was 
disapproved of by city dwellers. It is not without 
reason that originally this type of street art was 
called 涂鸦 tuya, which literally means ‘to smudge 
crows’ or ‘scribble’. This word stems from an old 
poem by Lu Tong (VIII–IX century) devoted to 
his little son who often smudged his books with 
ink. At present the art of graffiti has acquired 
popularity, and in big cities there are special walls 
assigned for graffiti writers. For example, the 
authorities of Chongqing city have dedicated 
a whole street Huangjueping (黄桷坪涂鸦街) 
for graffiti. Thirty-seven buildings with a total 
space of 50 thousand square meters in that street 
are covered with colourful art. This street is one 
of the biggest graffiti projects not only in China 
but in the whole world. However, in big Chinese 
cities the artistic self-expression of graffiti writers 
outside special zones in not welcomed and is seen 
as damage to the urban landscape [庞彦, 2011, 
p. 183]. That is why the modern tendency is the 
relocation of street art to the internet. Many graffiti 
writers create their works primarily in order to 
photograph them and post them on the internet so 
that a short-lived piece of art could continue its 
life online [Kotelnikova, 2019, p. 29].
In modern information society, online 
communication, including social networks and 
internet forums, has become an urgent need 
for people both in Russia and China. As a 
consequence, we can observe the emergence of 
internet subcultures which have acquired their 
own systems of values, language, manner of 
behaviour and other representations. At present 
the global network houses numerous internet 
subcultures, the most popular of which in both 
countries are gamers, bloggers, huckers, trolls, etc. 
One of the most widely spread Chinese 
internet subcultures is egao (恶搞亚文化) formed 
by means of morpheme contraction from the 
word combination 恶意搞笑 (to joke viciously). 
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 5
93
O.A. Leontovich, N.N. Kotelnikova. The Nature of Chinese and Russian Subcultures in Urban Discourse
Chinese sociologists apply the term egao to the 
practice of changing famous literary works, films, 
songs, videoclips, advertisements or imitating a 
celebrity by means of parody, collage, hyperbole, 
etc. in order to achieve a comic effect [胡疆锋, 
2008, p. 5; 张林, 2014, p. 338]. The result can be 
represented in the form of text, audio- or video 
material, photography or comics presented on 
the internet. The proliferation of this subculture 
was facilitated by such programs as Photoshop 
and Premiere, available for wide masses of 
internet users. Egao became so popular in China 
that it spread from the internet to television, 
newspapers and magazines. The egao subculture 
is predominantly represented by young people 
displaying critical, ironic or sarcastic perception 
of reality. Egao personifies the Chinese version of 
freedom of speech; however, its representatives 
produce contradictory impressions on the public. 
According to the results of a sociological survey 
carried out by “The Chinese Youth Newspaper”, 
89,9% of respondents believe that there should 
be certain limits – tabooed topics which cannot 
be ridiculed, such as national heroes [蔡骐, 谢莹, 
2008, p. 50].
The discourse analysis of Russian and 
Chinese subcultures also yields information 
about attitudes towards particular social groups. 
For example the Russian term majory (young 
people whose influential parents provide them 
with money and social benefits) has a negative 
connotation, as well as the Chinese nomination 
土豪 tuhao denoting the uncouth new rich who 
are fond of golden iPhones and expensive cars 
decorated with Swarovski crystals. The latter is 
juxtaposed to the positively marked terms 高富帅 
gaofushuai (lit. tall, rich, hansome, ‘prince on 
a white horse’) denoting an educated rich man 
with high social standing, and 白富美 baifumei 
(lit. white, rich, beautiful) – an attractive young 
woman with good manners and lots of money.
Subcultures form networks in which 
people are connected with each through different 
communication channels. The internet provides 
practically unlimited opportunities for such 
communication. The sign of our time is the 
transfer from interpersonal to technologically 
mediated communication. However, it is possible 
to notice a reverse process – from internet-based 
to offline forms of interaction. The changes in 
discourse patterns are associated with the growth 
of a new generation, with its own aspirations, 
perception of the environment and desire for 
social changes – all the factors that have a 
profound effect on contemporary urban life and 
its semiotic representation.
Final considerations
The subcultures discussed in our research are 
only a fraction of the urban mosaic representing 
a broad panorama of Chinese and Russian social 
life. They reflect the sociocultural dynamics 
of attitudes, values and lifestyles. Modern big 
cities as a complex medium of socialization are 
becoming more tolerant of differences in multiple 
forms of people’s behaviour. Globalization 
processes, mostly under the western influence, 
and the integration of cities into the world cultural 
space account for their universal character; 
however, they acquire nationally specific features 
transforming them into unique sociocultural 
phenomena.
NOTE
 
1 The reported study was funded by the Russian 
Foundation for Basic Research according to the 
research project № 17-29-09114.
 
 Исследование выполнено при финансовой 
поддержке РФФИ в рамках научного проекта 
№ 17-29-09114.
REFERENCES
Aiello G., Tosoni S., 2016. Going About the City: Methods 
and Methodologies for Urban Communication 
Research – Introduction. International Journal of 
Communication, vol. 10, pp. 1252-1262.
Aurigi A., 2005. Making the Digital City. Aldershot, 
Ashgate Publ. 236 p.
Aurigi A., 2012. Reflections Towards an Agenda for 
Urban-Designing the Digital City. Urban Design 
International, vol. 18, iss. 2, pp. 131-144.
Bakumova E., Kotelnikova N., 2019. Linguistic 
Expression of the Social Stratification of 
Chinese Urban Society. SHS Web of Conferences 
(The International Scientific and Practical 
Conference “Current Issues of Linguistics and 
Didactics: The Interdisciplinary Approach in 
Humanities and Social Sciences” (Volgograd, 
April 23–28, 2019)). Volgograd, s. n. Vol. 69. 
DOI: 10.1051/shsconf/20196900011.
Bennett A., Kahn-Harris K., 2004. After Subculture: 
Critical Studies in Contemporary Youth Culture. 
94
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 5
Basingstoke, Hants., New York, Palgrave 
Macmillan. 195 p.
Chen Fachun, Leontovich O., 2020. A Tale of Two Cities: 
Historical Narratives in the Russian and Chinese 
Urban Landscapes. Vestnik Volgogradskogo 
gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2. 
Yazykoznanie [Science Journal of Volgograd State 
University. Linguistics], vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 78-85. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2020.2.7.
Encyclopedia of Urban Studies, 2010. Green Bay, 
University of Wisconsin. 1080 p.
Fine G.A., Kleinman S., 1979. Rethinking Subculture: 
An Interactionist Analysis. American Journal of 
Sociology, vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 1-20. 
Galushina N.S., 2016. Subkultury: yazyki opisaniya v 
menyayushchihsya sociokulturnyh kontekstah 
[Subcultures: Description Languages in the 
Changing Sociocultural Contexts]. RSUH/
RGGU Bulletin: Literary Theory. Linguistics. 
Cultural Studies, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 120-135. DOI: 
10.28995/2686-7249-2016-2-120-135.
Gurevich P.S., 1998. Subkultura [Subculture]. 
Kul’turologiya. XX vek. V 2 t. T. 2 : enciklopediya 
[Cultural Studies. 20th Century. In 2 Vols. Vol. 2. 
Encyclopedia]. Saint Petersburg, Universitetskaya 
kniga Publ., pp. 450-453. 
Hall S., Jefferson T., eds., 2006. Resistance Through 
Rituals: Youth Subcultures in Post-War Britain. 
London, Routledge. 292 p.
Kotelnikova N.N., 2019. Molodezhnye subkul’tury 
v mediaurbanisticheskom prostranstve 
sovremennogo kitayskogo goroda [Youth 
Subcultures of a Modern Chinese City in the 
Context of Urban Communication Studies]. 
Gumanitarnye issledovaniya v Vostochnoy Sibiri 
i na Dal’nem Vostoke [Humanities Research in 
the Russian Far East], vol. 1, pp. 25-32. DOI: 
10.24866/1997-2857/2019-1/25-32. 
Kvyat A.G., 2013. Novye kommunikativnye praktiki 
v rossiyskih gorodakh [New Communication 
Practices in Russian Cities]. Dzyaloshinskiy I.M., 
Pil’gun M.A., eds. Razvitiye russkoyazychnogo 
mediaprostranstva: kommunikatsionnye i 
eticheskie problemy: materialy nauch.-prakt. konf. 
[Development of the Russian-Language Media 
Space: Communication and Ethical Problems. 
Conference Materials]. Moscow, Izd-vo APK i 
PPRO, pp. 351-360.
Kvyat A.G., 2014. Istoriya zarubezhnykh gorodskikh 
kommunikativnykh issledovaniy [The History 
of Foreign Urban Communication Studies]. 
Mediaskop [Mediascope], vol. 4. URL: http://
www.mediascope.ru/1598.
Lefebvre H., 1991. The Production of Space. Malden, 
Blackwell. 464 p. (Original work published in 
1974).
Leontovich O.A., 2018. The All-Seeing Eye of the City 
from the Perspective of Urban Communication 
Studies. Vestnik Volgogradskogo gosudarstvennogo 
universiteta. Seriya 2. Yazykoznanie [Science 
Journal of Volgograd State University. Linguistics], 
vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 206-213. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.15688/ jvolsu2.2018.4.20.
Leontovich O.A., 2019. New Forms of Urban Discourse 
As a Reflection of Social Сhange. Communication 
Studies, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 645-654. DOI: 
10.25513/2413-6182.2019.6(3).645-654.
Leontovich O.A., 2020. Yazyk bolshogo goroda: klyuchevye 
problemy mediaurbanistiki [Language of a Big City: 
Key Issues of Urban Communication Studies]. 
Etnopsikholingvistika [Ethnopsycholinguistics], 
vol. 3, pp. 19-34. DOI: 10.31249/epl/2020.03.02.
Levikova S.I., 2007. Molodezhnaya kul’tura [Youth 
Culture]. Moscow, Vuzovskaya kniga. 360 p. 
Mellor J.R., 1977. Urban Sociology in an Urbanized 
Society. London, Routledge & Kegan Paul. 328 p.
Omelchenko E.L., 2000. Molodezhnye kul’tury i 
subkul’tury [Youth Cultures and Subcultures]. 
Moscow, Institut sotsiologii RAN Publ. 262 p. 
Parker S., 2015. Urban Theory and the Urban 
Experience. Encountering the City. London, 
New York, Routledge. 290 p.
Pratt A.C., 2011. The Cultural Contradictions of the 
Creative City. City, Culture and Society, vol. 2, 
iss. 3, pp. 123-130.
Sikevich Z.V., 1990. Molodezhnaya kul’tura: «za» i 
«protiv»: Zametki sotsiologa [Youth Culture: 
“For” and “Against”: Notes of a Sociologist]. 
Leningrad, Lenizdat Publ. 206 p. 
Simmel G., 1950. Metropolis and Mental Life. 
Sociology of Georg Simmel. Chicago, Free Press. 
523 p. (Original work published in 1903).
Tarantino M., Tosoni S., 2013. Media and the Social 
Production of Urban Space: Towards an 
Integrated Approach Towards the Controversial 
Nature of Urban Space. Media & The City: 
Urbanism, Technology, Communication. S. l., 
Cambridge Scholar Publishing, Newcastle 
Upon Tyne, pp. 2-31. URL: http://hdl.handle.
net/10807/46851.
The Charter of the New Urbanism. URL: https.www.
cnu.org/who-we-are/charter-new-urbanism.
Weber M., 1966. General Economic History. New 
York, Collier Books. 288 p. (Original work 
published in 1923).
Weber M., 1978. The City (Non-Legitimate 
Domination). Economy and Society: An Outline 
of Interpretive Sociology. Berkeley, University 
of California Press, vol. 2, part 16, pp. 1212-1372 
(Original work published in 1922).
Wu Yao, 2017. Sravnitelnyi analiz sotsialnykh struktur 
Rossii i Kitaya [Comparative Analysis of Russian 
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 5
95
O.A. Leontovich, N.N. Kotelnikova. The Nature of Chinese and Russian Subcultures in Urban Discourse
and Chinese Social Structures]. Obshchestvo: 
sociologiya, psihologiya, pedagogika [Society: 
Sociology, Psychology, Ppedagogics], vol. 5, 
pp. 57-60.
Yunakovskaya A.A., 2011. “Jazyk goroda” kak 
lingvisticheskaja problema [“City Language” 
As Linguistic Problem]. Vestnik Omskogo 
universiteta [Herald of Omsk University], vol. 3, 
pp. 193-197.
蔡骐 (Cai Qi), 谢莹 (Xie Ying), 2008. 从“恶搞福
娃”现象反思网络恶搞风潮 [Rethinking the 
Internet Spoof “egao” from the Phenomenon of 
“Pranking Fuwa”]. 信息网络安全 [Information 
Network Security], vol. 6, pp. 50-52. 
高丙中 (Gao Bingzhong), 1997. 主文化、亚文
化、反文化与中国文化的变迁 [Changes in 
Mainstream Culture, Subcultures, Countercultures 
and Chinese Culture]. 社会学研究 [Social 
Science Research], vol. 1, pp. 113-117. 
胡疆锋 (Hu Jiangfeng), 2008. 恶搞与青年亚文化 
[Egao and Youth Subculture]. 中国青年研究 
[China Youth Study], vol. 6, pp. 5-10.
刘黎黎 (Liu Lili), 2013. “小清新”风格的亚文化解
读 [Sub-Cultural Understanding of Fresh and 
Aestheticism Style]. 艺术百家 [A Hundred 
Schools in Art], vol. 1, pp. 71-73. 
流响 (Liu Xiang), 2014. “飞特族”的光与影 [The 
Light and Shadow of the “Feitezu”]. 高中生：
职教与就业 [High School Students: Vocational 
Education and Employment], vol. 7, pp. 16-17. 
庞彦 (Pang Yan), 2011. 浅谈城市涂鸦在中国的
合法性 [Talking About the Legality of Urban 
Graffiti in China]. 文艺生活 [Literature Life], 
vol. 3, pp. 181-183. 
社会科学大词典 [Social Science Dictionary], 1989. 
彭克宏主编. 北京: 中国国际广播出版社 
[Beijing, China International Radio Press]. 
S. l., s. n. 1279 p. 
谯燕 (Qiao Yan), 2012. 传媒新词 “御宅族”分析 [The 
Analysis of the New Media Word “otaku”]. 新闻
与传播研究 [Mass Communication Research], 
vol. 3, pp. 5-6. 
王福帅 (Wang Fushuai), 杨阳 (Yang Yang), 2014. 
对“杀马特”现象的理解与反思 [Understanding 
of the Phenomenon of “Shamate”]. 青年与社会 
[Youth and Society], vol. 5, pp. 336-337. 
王思妮 (Wang Sini), 2010. 对网络新词语“X族”的
替换分析 [The Analysis of the New Network 
Word “X Zu”]. 北方文学 [Northern Literature], 
vol. 9, pp. 87-88. 
王晓静 (Wang Xiaojing), 2010. “族”与“族”类词浅析 
[“Family” and “Family” Category Words]. 传奇•
传记文学选刊 [Legend. Biography Literary 
Selection], vol. 7, pp. 35-37. 
肖遥遥 (Xiao Yaoyao), 2009. “族”类汉语新词语
法化浅析 [Grammatical Analysis of Chinese 
Neologisms with the Morpheme “Family”]. 中
州大学学报 [Journal of Zhongzhou University], 
vol. 2, pp. 75-77. 
许苏民 (Xu Sumin), 1990. 文化哲学 [Philosophy 
of Culture]. 上海人民出版社 [Shanghai, 
Shanghairen Chubanshe]. 317 p. 
“月光族”变“月欠族” 不少年轻人靠借贷消费度日 
[“Yueguangzu” Becoming “Yueqianzu”. A Lot of 
Young People Use Loans for Living Expenses], 
2019. 新浪财经 [Sina Finance]. URL: http://
finance.sina.com.cn/roll/2019-02-19/doc-
ihqfskcp6484532.shtml. 
曾丹 (Zeng Dan), 2010. 试析新词语“钟摆族” [The 
Analysis of the Neologism “Pendulum Clan”]. 
现代语文(语言研究版) [Modern Language 
(Language Research Edition)], vol. 11, 
pp. 147-148. 
张洪涛 (Zhang Hongtao). 30 名昆明年轻人中就
有 9 个“月欠族” [Nine of 30 Kunming 
Young People Are “Yueqianzu”]. 都市时
报数字报 [The Metropolitan Times Digital 
Newspaper], 02.03.2019. URL: http://times.
clzg.cn/html/2019-03/02/content_106180.htm. 
张林 (Zhang Lin), 2014. 网络恶搞现象分析 [The 
Analysis of the Egao Phenomenon in the 
Network]. 青年与社会 [Youth and Society], 
vol. 13, pp. 338-339. 
赵声馗 (Zhao Shengkui), 2014. “蚁族”社会资本的缺
失与建构 [The Construction of Social Capital 
of “Ant Tribe”]. 河北青年管理干部学院学报 
[Journal of Hebei Youth Administrative Cadres 
College], vol. 6, pp. 7-11.
139 万人次参加中国国际动漫节 [1.39 Million 
People Took Part in the China International Anime 
Festival], 2017. URL: http://www.xinhuanet.com/
politics/2017-05/03/c_129585203.htm.
96
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 5
Information About the Authors
Olga A. Leontovich, Doctor of Sciences (Philology), Professor, Head of the Department 
of Intercultural Communication and Translation, Volgograd State Socio-Pedagogical University, 
Prosp. Leninа, 27, 400005 Volgograd, Russia; Professor, Tianjin Foreign Studies University, Machang 
Road, 117, Tianjin, China, olgaleo@list.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0972-4609
Nadezhda N. Kotelnikova, Candidate of Sciences (Pedagogy), Associate Professor, Department 
of Intercultural Communication and Translation, Director of Confucius Institute, Volgograd State Socio-
Pedagogical University, Prosp. Leninа, 27, 400005 Volgograd, Russia, kotelnikova_n_n@yahoo.com, 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9900-1983
Информация об авторах
Ольга Аркадьевна Леонтович, доктор филологических наук, профессор, заведующая 
кафедрой межкультурной коммуникации и перевода, Волгоградский государственный социально-
педагогический университет, просп. Ленина, 27, 400005 г. Волгоград, Россия; профессор, Тянь-
цзиньский университет иностранных языков, ул. Мачандао, 117, г. Тяньцзинь, Китай, olgaleo@
list.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0972-4609
Надежда Николаевна Котельникова, кандидат педагогических наук, доцент кафедры 
межкультурной коммуникации и перевода, директор Института Конфуция, Волгоградский го-
сударственный социально-педагогический университет, просп. Ленина, 27, 400005 г. Волгоград, 
Россия, kotelnikova_n_n@yahoo.com, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9900-1983
