Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
45
Popova O.I., Volkova I.D., Fadeeva M.Yu., 2021
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА

www.volsu.ru
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.4
UDC 81’42:004.738.1
Submitted: 30.01.2021
LBC 81.055.51.5
Accepted: 30.03.2021
LOCALIZATION AND INTERNATIONALIZATION OF TEXTS
OF THE MEDIA DISCOURSE
Olga I. Popova
Volgograd State University, Volgograd, Russia
Irina D. Volkova
Volgograd State University, Volgograd, Russia
Marina Yu. Fadeeva
Volgograd State University, Volgograd, Russia
Abstract. The article presents the results of a comparative analysis of the original and secondary texts of
media discourse aimed at identifying the ways to localize and internationalize the verbal content of news websites.
The study has been conducted on the material of news hypertexts in four languages – Russian, English, German
and French, posted on the international Internet resource rt.com, Business Insider news portal, National Review
newspaper, RTD Documentary Channel, L’Express journal. The authors substantiate the importance of using the
terms ‘localization’ and ‘internationalization’ in translation studies to name inter-language transformations used
in creating news messages, and analyze the definitions of these concepts in the frameworks of linguistics. The
analysis shows that in many cases the standard translation model “source texttranslation text”, which presupposes
a certain level of semantic equivalence, loses its relevance, since the secondary text is a new verbal product. It has
been shown that the localized verbal space of the analyzed international media websites is created through the use
of the following translation techniques: addition / omission of information in accordance with the pragmatic
characteristics of readers, inclusion of culture-specific vocabulary in the secondary text, explication of toponyms
and proper names, neutralization of imagery, omission of precision vocabulary, indication of a personal viewpoint
of a secondary text’s author, historical reference to allusions. It has also been revealed that internationalization of
texts is performed through omission of cultural markers, addition of phrases emphasizing the view on the country
“from outside”, explication of toponyms, replacing proper names with generalized lexemes, as well as by indicating
the positions of English-speaking countries on topical issues.
Key words: media discourse, localization, internationalization, verbal content, international news website,
linguocultural adaptation.
Citation. Popova O.I., Volkova I.D., Fadeeva M.Yu. Localization and Internationalization of Texts of the Media
Discourse. Vestnik Volgogradskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2. Yazykoznanie [Science  Journal  of
Volgograd  State  University. Linguistics], 2021, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 45-54. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.4
УДК 81’42:004.738.1
Дата поступления статьи: 30.01.2021
ББК 81.055.51.5
Дата принятия статьи: 30.03.2021
ЛОКАЛИЗАЦИЯ И ИНТЕРНАЦИОНАЛИЗАЦИЯ ТЕКСТОВ
МЕДИЙНОГО ДИСКУРСА
Ольга Ильинична Попова
Волгоградский государственный университет, г. Волгоград, Россия
Ирина Дмитриевна Волкова
Волгоградский государственный университет, г. Волгоград, Россия
46
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
Марина Юрьевна Фадеева
Волгоградский государственный университет, г. Волгоград, Россия
Аннотация. В статье представлены результаты сравнительного анализа оригинальных и вторичных
текстов медийного дискурса, направленного на выявление способов локализации и интернационализации
вербального контента новостных сайтов. Материалом исследования избраны гипертексты на русском, анг-
лийском, немецком и французском языках, размещенные на международном интернет-ресурсе rt.com и
новостных сайтах «Business Insider», «National Review», «RTД Documentary Channel», «L’Express». Автора-
ми обоснована важность использования терминов «локализация» и «интернационализация» в транслатоло-
гии для наименования межъязыковых трансформаций, используемых при создании новостных сообщений,
и проведен аналитический обзор определений данных понятий сквозь призму лингвистики. В результате
анализа установлено, что во многих случаях стандартная модель перевода «исходный текст  текст перево-
да», предполагающая определенный уровень семантической эквивалентности, теряет актуальность, поскольку
вторичный текст представляет собой новый вербальный продукт. Показано, что локализованное вербальное
пространство рассмотренных международных новостных сайтов создается за счет добавления / опущения
информации в соответствии с прагматическими характеристиками читателей, включения национально-куль-
турной лексики во вторичный текст, экспликации географических реалий и имен собственных, нейтрализа-
ции образности, опущения прецизионной лексики, указания личной позиции автора вторичного текста,
указания исторической справки к аллюзиям. Выявлено, что интернационализация текстов осуществляется
посредством нейтрализации их культурной маркированности, добавления высказываний, подчеркивающих
взгляд на страну «извне», экспликации географических реалий, опущения имен собственных и их замены
генерализованной лексикой, а также указания позиций англоязычных стран по рассматриваемой теме.
Ключевые слова: медийный дискурс, локализация, интернационализация, вербальный контент, меж-
дународный новостной сайт, лингвокультурная адаптация.
Цитирование. Попова О. И., Волкова И. Д., Фадеева М. Ю. Локализация и интернационализация текстов
медийного дискурса // Вестник Волгоградского государственного университета. Серия 2, Языкознание. –
2021. – Т. 20, № 3. – С. 45–54. – (На англ. яз.). – DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.4
Introduction
Synergy of the existential reality of society
with the media reality is beyond doubt today. News
is becoming the main global media product in high
demand around the world. As it circulates from
producer to consumer, news content may be subject
to internationalization, globalization or localization.
Globalization allows the global circulation of meaning
and shapes the nature of the discourses that are
disseminated in different localities. However,
globalization theory has remained predominantly silent
about the fundamental role of translation in mediating
global information flows, assuming that global texts
can automatically be received by audiences and
obscuring the crucial intervention of translation in
the production of a multiplicity of local versions of
global news events [Bielsa, Bassnett, 2016, p. 93].
According to E.Yu. Novikova, informational
development of modern society and expansion of
instrumental technological capabilities in the
practice of translation predetermined the need for
translators to possess additional competencies
[Novikova, 2017, p. 91].
Widespread internetization has strengthened
the position of news agencies as the primary news
providers, making them monopolies in the
broadcasting segment. A distinctive feature of an
international news agency is the ability to bring
information to a foreign audience directly, without
intermediaries, significantly reducing the risk of
distortion of information by local media. Modern
news agencies filter news and analytical products
online for the audience that requires news stories
on specific topics. Such collections differ
significantly in the layout of news, their volume
and frequency [Madera, 2018].
The need to deal with linguistic diversity in
news production and the simultaneous circulation
of news in different languages makes translation
an important part of news agency work.
Translation intervenes from the start in the
process of news gathering, and is often the point
of departure for international journalists who write
about a foreign reality. It entails a considerable
amount of transformation of the source text, which
results in the significantly different content of a
target text.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
47
O.I. Popova, I.D. Volkova, M.Yu. Fadeeva. Localization and Internationalization of Texts of the Media Discourse
The purpose of this study is to consider the
terms ‘localization’ and ‘internationalization’ from
a linguistic point of view and to identify the ways
to localize or internationalize verbal content of
Internet media resources. To achieve this goal,
the following tasks have been solved: the
importance of using the terms ‘localization’ and
‘internationalization’ in translation studies has been
substantiated, an analytical review of the existing
definitions of these terms has been carried out, a
comparative analysis of original and secondary
texts of Internet media discourse has been
conducted, and the translation techniques ensuring
localization and internationalization of media texts
for a foreign target audience have been revealed.
Research material and methods
The research material is represented with
hypertexts in Russian, English, German and
French languages posted on the Internet resource
rt.com, which is an international multilingual
network of information TV channels, as well as
by the verbal content of Business Insider news
portal, National Review newspaper, RTD
Documentary Channel, L’Express journal. The
genre range of the analyzed materials consists of
news reports, journalistic articles, annotations of
reports.
The research methodology consists in using
the methods of comparative analysis, contextual,
interpretive and discourse analysis, analysis of the
text structure.
The theoretical and methodological base of
this study is made up of the provisions of such
academic areas as translation theory [Mityagina,
2014; Pym, 2004; 2010; Sandrini, 2008; etc.],
studies of linguistic localization [Achkasov, 2017;
Androutsopoulos, 2010; Anisimov, Borisova,
Konson, 2019; Bernal, 2006], studies of media
discourse [Bassnett, 2005; Davier, van Doorslaer,
2018; Dobrosklonskaya, 2015; Kalendr, 2016;
Kozhemyakin, 2010; Orengo, 2005].
Results and discussion
Media discourse as a type of discourse
produced in the field of mass media
communication is inextricably linked with ideology.
In the media discourse, information is converted
into meanings (knowledge construction),
knowledge is transferred from the institutional
level to the popular one, and the fusion of various
types of information (for example, political and
entertainment, event and advertising) takes place.
In this case, as E.A. Kozhemyakin notes, the truth,
or significance of the knowledge gained is
determined by the linguo-social, sociocultural and,
more broadly, by the historical and civilizational
contexts [Kozhemyakin, 2010, p. 14].
The term ‘internationalization’ originating
from the sphere of politics and economy
traditionally refers to adaptation of national
products to international criteria within the
framework of development and strengthening of
relations between countries. The term has
increasingly been used in other areas of
knowledge as well. Internationalization of news
discourse in this article means the creation of a
media product in the context of global trends in
accordance with the requirements of the global
information market.
According 
to Russian 
researcher
A.V. Achkasov, the concept of localization means
adaptation of a verbal product, including cultural,
linguistic, social, economic, political and legal
aspects, and therefore it can act as a generic
concept for all types of complex verbal
modifications [Achkasov, 2017, p. 288]. Since we
are talking primarily about the verbal element of
information products, localization industry is an
important segment of the linguistic services
market, and in many contexts this term is
increasingly used instead of the traditional concept
of translation [Austermühl, Mirwald, 2010, p. 6].
Since 2005, the American consulting company
Common Sense Advisory has published annual
rankings of the leading language service providers,
and as of 2019, the top 5 positions are held by
TransPerfect, Lionbridge, LanguageLine Solutions,
SDL and RWS [The Slator 2019...]. The sector
of localization services provided by these
companies is represented by a wide range of
directions: Software and App Localization,
Website Localization, Multimedia Localization,
Training materials / eLearning, Subtitles
Localization, Document Localization.
The key role of the verbal component in the
general structure of the object of localization and
the central place of translation in the localization
process determine the active interest of
translators in this concept. As P. Sandrini rightly
48
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
notes that the theory of translation should integrate
the localization industry in order to prevent the
emergence of an independent science – the
theory of localization, which will compete with
translation studies [Sandrini, 2008]. The observed
tendency of translation studies to borrow this term
is associated with the search for effective ways
of ensuring the global Internet polylogue in various
communicative genres. Against the background
of this reality, the following definitions of
localization seem quite logical: a discursive
process aimed at changing globally accessible
media content [Androutsopoulos, 2010, p. 205], a
complex form of pragmatic adaptation [Mityagina,
2014, p. 347], etc. Besides, a number of
researchers suggest that the use of the term
‘localization’ for denoting the translation process
requires specification of the scope of its use with
the adjective linguistic – linguistic localization
[Anisimov, Borisova, Konson, 2019; Bernal, 2006;
Voskoboynik, Gorchakova, 2014].
The study of the phenomenon of linguistic
localization on the example of texts of media
discourse is of particular interest, since this
discourse type is one of the most dynamically
developing forms of intercultural communication,
taking into account electronic information
exchange and computer mediation. In addition,
the informing and motivating functions are the
backbone ones in the media discourse [Kalendr,
2016, p. 326], and these are also the key functions
determining the need to use the strategy of
localization as linguistic and cultural adaptation.
L. Davier and L. van Doorslaer emphasize
the problem of corpus research of news messages
in a multilingual context due to the difficulty of
determining the source text, given the large
number of world news agencies that post fresh
news on their websites [Davier, van Doorslaer,
2018]. As a rule, the objects of analysis in this
case are texts that are similar in content, which
determines the rarity of news translation in the
traditional sense of this process with the
reproduction of the original structure of statements
in the text. S. Bassnett points to the need of
searching for a concept that could designate the
process of inter- and intra-lingual text
transformations used in creating news messages
in a global context [Bassnett, 2005, p. 130].
According to A. Orengo, the global-commercial
nature of news dissemination determines the
preference for the concept of localization to name
this process [Orengo, 2005, p. 168].
The creation of news messages is often carried
out according to the internationalization +
localization scheme: global news agencies,
multilingual news channels and other international
media are the source of 90% of foreign news for
audiences in various countries, which are
subsequently translated and localized [Pym, 2010,
p. 126]. In our opinion, any hypertext, including
the text of media discourse, is most consistent
with the concept of a moving text proposed by
E. Pym to denote a dynamic text that is in constant
distribution in time and space [Pym, 2004, p. 8].
The Internet resource rt.com is promoted as
an international multilingual channel, which presents
an alternative view of current events. The InoTV
section of the Russian-language version of this site
is one of the few examples of correspondence of
the process of creating secondary news texts to
the traditional translation model source text 
secondary text. This section includes translated
Russian-language versions of original news reports
and journalistic articles in various languages. Let’s
consider translation techniques that ensure
localization of hypertexts into Russian. The headline
of one of the newspaper articles about the US
elections in the InoTV section is represented by
the following heading:
Отделить зёрна от плевел: Нацгвардия допол-
нительно проверит своих солдат на благонадёж-
ность перед инаугурацией (BI: отделить зёрна от
плевел).
In the original English version of this article
posted on one of the world’s leading news portals
Business Insider, the headline is as follows:
The National Guard is doing background checks
on its own soldiers to shore up security during the
inauguration (The National Guard).
As can be seen from the above examples,
in the process of translating the headline into
Russian, the technique of adding the
phraseological unit “отделить зёрна от плевел”
with the meaning “to separate the harmful from
the useful” was used. This idiom is frequently used
in various genres of journalistic and literary
discourse in Russia. K.S. Ergaliev et al. point to
the fact that headlines of media texts not only
express and generalize information, but also
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
49
O.I. Popova, I.D. Volkova, M.Yu. Fadeeva. Localization and Internationalization of Texts of the Media Discourse
attract attention of potential readers [Ergaliev,
Tekzhanov, Asanbaeva, 2014]. Besides, according
to Pauline Farris, expert in media content
localization, various slang terms, regional phrasings,
and sayings make content more interesting and can
add personality [A Guide...]. In this regard, the
addition of phraseological units to the Russian-
language text contributes to its localization for the
target audience of Russian speakers.
Explication of toponyms in secondary texts
also seems to be an important technique of
localization, since these lexical units relate to
national and cultural vocabulary and are one of
the most difficult to perceive and identify for
foreign readers. For example, the journalistic
article by a German traveler contains the toponym
‘Upper East Side of Manhattan’:
Back home where I live, on the Upper East Side
of Manhattan, they used to have – and maybe they
still have – a BLM vigil every evening at 7 p.m. (Russia
Has Its Own).
In this case, explication is carried out by
adding the name of the country, in which the
specified region is located:
Там, где я жил в США, на Верхнем Ист-Сайде
Манхеттена, каждый вечер в семь часов проходили –
и, возможно, до сих пор проходят – пикеты активис-
тов Black Lives Matter («Русский путь» борьбы).
Let’s turn to consideration of the techniques
used in translation of the French texts of the InoTV
website into Russian. One of the news articles
posted on this website is taken from the famous
French journal L’Express and is headlined as
follows: Sondage: Marine Le Pen et Emmanuel
Macron au coude-à-coude au second tour en
2022. The word for word translation into Russian
is the following: Опрос: Марин Ле Пен и Эма-
нюэль Макрон – идут ноздря в ноздрю во
втором туре в 2022 году (translation from
French by O.P.). In the Russian-language version
of the website under study, the vernacular
expression “идти ноздря в ноздрю”, which came
to journalism from equestrian sports and means
“side by side, on the same line, on the same level”
lost its figurative meaning and acquired a neutral,
descriptive character: L’Express: за Марин Ле
Пен собирается проголосовать рекордное
число французов.
Headlines of French media have always been
highly imaginative, but for the Russian-speaking
audience, the use of vernaculars does not correlate
well with such a respectable journal as L’Express.
Besides, the very fact of confrontation between two
well-known political leaders is absent in the secondary
text, despite the fact that the original headline
contains a hint of some intrigue in the electoral
process in the near future. Thus, in this case,
localization of the text for the Russian-speaking
audience is provided by the neutralization of imagery.
Localization from French into Russian can
also be provided through omission of precision
vocabulary in the secondary text.
As can be seen from Table 1, the names of
the PR agency CommStrat in Paris and the weekly
journal L’Opinion have been omitted in the
Russian version, given that they are little known
to the general public and can only overload basic
information.
The section “Россия” of the website
contains news about the events taking place in
Russia, and these may be of interest for a foreign
reader. In one of the texts localized for French
audience, V.V. Putin’s speech at the international
economic forum in Davos has been rendered. The
President characterizes the European Union as a
“partenaire privilégié et naturel”. As Table 2
shows, localization is carried out by including
additional information designed to break the ice
between our countries and convince partners of
their interest in closer ties.
Table 1. Original French-language and localized Russian-language text fragments of the news article
“Sondage: Marine Le Pen et Emmanuel Macron au coude-à-coude au second tour en 2022”
Original text 
Localized text 
Le résultat de ce sondage de second tour, réalisé par 
Harris 
Interactive, 
n’a 
pas 
été 
rendu 
public, 
contrairement à celui du 1er tour. Ils ont été commandés 
par le cabinet CommStrat et le quotidien L’Opinion. 
Chez Harris Interactive, on refuse de commenter 
publiquement un sondage non publié (Sondage). 
Компания Harris Interactive отказалась прокомменти-
ровать отказ от публикации второй части работы. 
Однако эксперт по соцопросам рассказал француз-
ской газете, что небольшой разрыв между двумя 
кандидатами попадает под допустимую погрешность 
исследования, которая является важной для второго 
тура (L’Express).  
 
50
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
The example of localization of French text
for Russian audience about the death of the
famous journalist Larry King is shown in Table 3.
The original text was made up in the genre of a
traditional obituary, while the Russian-language
one includes the author’s personal position, which
is expressed by the vocabulary of a different
register – “ужасная, ужасная потеря”, “тонкий,
замечательный, нет слов”.
Let us now turn to considering the cases of
translating news from Russian into German using
the strategy of localization. The German-language
version of the RT channel can also be referred to
as a localized one. The news article under the
headline “Wegen Doping-Skandals: Russland will
“Katjuscha” statt verbotener Hymne bei Olympia
singen” (original Russian headline is “Матыцин
поддержал идею использовать «Катюшу» в
качестве гимна на ОИ”) informs readers about
the intention of the Russian Olympic Committee
to use the folk song Katyusha as the national
anthem at the upcoming Olympic Games. The
need for an alternative option is explained in the
headline – because of the doping scandal, the
Russian national teams will play at the World
Championships and the Olympic Games under a
neutral flag for two years. The requirement also
applies to the choice of musical composition.
In this case, the localization markers include full
name and position of Mr. Matytsin:
Der russische Sportminister Oleg Matytsin hat
den Vorschlag der Sportlerkommission der Russischen
Olympischen Kommission unterstützt, das Lied
“Katjuscha” anstelle der Nationalhymne bei den
Olympischen Spielen zu verwenden (Wegen Doping-
Skandals).
Short historical reference to the song, which
is absent in the original Russian-language text
(Матыцин поддержал идею...), also contributes
to text localization in the German linguocultural
space:
“Katjuscha” war Russlands beliebtestes Lied im
Zweiten Weltkrieg und ist weit über die Grenzen des
Landes hinaus bekannt (Wegen Doping-Skandals).
Despite the transcribed spelling and the use
of quotation marks, indicating precedence, the
headline of the composition would hardly be
familiar to the modern German-speaking audience
of the channel.
The RTD section of the above website
contains short descriptions of the reports in two
languages – Russian and English with the former
one being the source language. In this case, we
are talking about the internationalization of content,
since in the absence of versions in other languages,
English-language texts serve as a global resource
for recipients with different levels of English
proficiency – native speakers, as well as readers
for whom English is a second or foreign language.
Table 2. Original Russian-language and localized French-language text fragments of the news
article “Вероятность столкнуться с настоящим срывом в мировом развитии: Путин
заявил об угрозе начала борьбы всех против всех”
Original text 
Localized text 
В ходе своего выступления на форуме Путин также 
заявил, что у России и Европы есть общие фунда-
ментальные вещи, в том числе культура (Путин зая-
вил об угрозе).  
Vladimir Poutine a ensuite évoqué les relations entre son 
pays et l’Union européenne, qu’il considère comme «un 
partenaire privilégié» et «naturel» avec qui la Russie 
partage une culture commune (Poutine alerte sur le 
risque).  
 
Table 3. Original French-language and localized Russian-language text fragments of the news
article “Décès du célèbre journaliste américain Larry King”
Original text 
Localized text 
Décès du célèbre journaliste américain Larry King 
23 janv. 2021, 14:11 Larry King arrives en novembre 
2017. Larry King, considéré comme l’un des plus grands 
interviewers, est décédé à l’âge de 87 ans, a fait savoir sa 
famille. Depuis son départ de CNN, le célèbre journaliste 
américain présentait deux talk-shows diffusés sur RT 
America. Les proches de Larry King ont annoncé ce 
23 janvier son décès, à l'âge de 87 ans (Décès du célèbre 
journaliste). 
23 января 2021, 16:03 в возрасте 87 лет умер амери-
канский телеведущий, автор программ на телеканале 
RT Ларри Кинг. Об этом сообщила в своём Telegram-
канале главный редактор RT Маргарита Симоньян. 
«А у нас ужасная, ужасная потеря. Ларри Кинг. 
Главная легенда мирового телевидения, его самое из-
вестное имя, самое известное лицо. Тонкий, с бле-
стящим юмором, замечательный. Нет слов», – на-
писала она (Умер Ларри Кинг). 
 
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
51
O.I. Popova, I.D. Volkova, M.Yu. Fadeeva. Localization and Internationalization of Texts of the Media Discourse
The text fragments given in Table 4 are the
original and the internationalized versions of the
annotation to the report about helping WWII veterans.
The performed internationalization is
evidenced by the use of the phrase “national matter
in Russia” in the English subheading, which is
absent in the original and emphasizes the view of
the country from the outside, as well as specification
of the geographical location of the city of
Simferopol – “in southern Russia”. In addition, the
translator omits the mention of Russian celebrities
(Leonid Yakubovich and Nadezhda Babkina),
limiting text to the culturally neutral wording “making
the dreams of the elderly vets come true”. As can
be seen from the above texts, which are
characterized by linguistic asymmetry, the quality
of the secondary text cannot be assessed from the
viewpoint of equivalence, which is traditional for
translation theory, and this is quite consistent with
E. Prunì’s statement that the creation of a new
text based on the original and cultural adaptation
of web pages increasingly take for granted areas
of translators’ activity today [Prunì, 2015, p. 25].
The similar trend can be observed in the
example given in Table 5.
In the internationalized text, the Russian names
Veronika Matyushina and Sergey Klochek are
replaced by the neutral expression “A Russian couple”.
One more example associated with
domestication of the Russian text in the English
linguocultural space refers to the translation of
the Russian-language article (Еда как угроза)
for the global audience. The original text lacks
geographical markers, while its English-language
version mentions the viewpoints of the United
Kingdom and the United States on the main
problem of the article:
In the UK, the fight against GMO means the
commercial planting of genetically engineered crops
is banned (The Peril on Your Plate).
A robust movement against GMO flourishes in
the US, the world’s leader in the GM production (The
Peril on Your Plate).
These are one of the key English-speaking
countries in the world and their positions on the
discussed topic in the internationalized version may
seem relevant to the foreign audience.
Conclusion
Thus, the present research outlines the
importance of using the terms ‘localization’ and
‘internationalization’ in translation studies to
denote translation techniques used to adapt media
verbal content to target audience demands. In the
course of the study, we prove the functionality of
Table 4. Original Russian-language and internationalized English-language text fragments of
the report annotation “Спасибо за мечту. Кто сегодня помогает ветеранам ВОВ”
Original text 
Internationalized version 
Спасибо за мечту. Кто сегодня помогает ветера-
нам ВОВ 
Жители Симферополя и Нижнего Новгорода 
создали собственные благотворительные проекты. 
А Антон Савчук организовал службу бесплатного 
ремонта квартир, которая быстро обрела популяр-
ность в сети. Благодаря этим проектам мечта многих 
ветеранов уже осуществилась. Кому-то обновили 
жильё, починили забор или купили утюг, а кто-то 
смог увидеться с ведущими любимой телепереда-
чи – например, с Леонидом Якубовичем и Надеж-
дой Бабкиной (Спасибо за мечту).  
How to Thank Heroes 
Why supporting WWII veterans is a national mat-
ter in Russia today 
Yaroslav from Simferopol, in southern Russia, 
launched a website where veterans could post their 
wishes. Anton fundraised for his project to help elderly 
Russians, particularly single veterans. His team reno-
vates old flats for free, and this will be their tenth repair. 
The internet embraced the initiative with people in other 
parts of the country joining Anton’s mission. 
Many committed people responded to the idea, of-
fering their help in making the dreams of the elderly 
vets come true (How to Thank Heroes). 
 
Table 5. Original Russian-language and internationalized English-language text fragments of
the report annotation “Моя дикая семья”
Original text 
Internationalized version 
Однако теперь у них есть дом, еда и уход – благодаря 
руководителям центра, Веронике Матюшиной и её 
мужу Сергею Клочеку, а также другим сотрудникам 
(Моя дикая семья). 
A Russian couple says they’re mum and dad to scores of 
wild animals they look after in a refuge they’ve built on 
their farm (My wild family). 
 
52
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
the investigated terms in denoting inter-language
textual transformations used in the creation of
secondary texts of media discourse in online space
of multilingual media websites. The analysis
shows that in many cases the standard translation
model “source text  translation text”, which
presupposes a certain level of semantic
equivalence, loses its relevance, since the
secondary text is often a completely new verbal
product. Transformations of individual words and
phrases also relate to the context of the terms
studied, since they are primarily associated with
the global commercial nature of the dissemination
of news messages on the Internet, which
presupposes taking into account the cultural and
geographic characteristics of target audiences in
case of localization or leveling these
characteristics in case of internationalization.
Besides, comparative analysis of news and
reports posted in different languages shows that
different viewpoints are updated under the
influence of ideological factors. Promotion of a
certain position in the translation of news texts
indicates the desire to meet the expectations of
the recipients, and, consequently, the existence of
certain perceptions in relation to another country.
The localized verbal space of the analyzed
international media websites is created through
the use of the following translation techniques:
addition / omission of information in accordance
with the pragmatic characteristics of readers,
inclusion of culture-specific vocabulary in the
secondary text, explication of toponyms and
proper names, neutralization of imagery, omission
of precision vocabulary, indication of a personal
viewpoint of a secondary text’s author, indication
of historical reference to allusions.
The internationalized, or English-language,
verbal space of the websites is created by
omission of cultural markers, addition of phrases
emphasizing the view of the country “from the
outside”, explication of toponyms, replacing proper
names with generalized lexemes, as well as by
indicating the positions of English-speaking
countries on topical issues.
Thus, international news remain locale-
specific in a world whose major trends and
influences are increasingly global. Much of the
world’s news coverage is arranged according to
national boundaries and constructed in terms of
national interests.
REFERENCES
A Guide: Content Localization on Social Media for
Global Audiences. URL: https://www.addthis.com/
academy/a-guide-content-localization-on-social-
media-for-global-audiences (accessed 20 January
2021).
Achkasov A.V., 2017. Rethinking the Scope of Localization.
Journal of Siberian Federal University. Humanities
& Social Sciences, no. 3 (10), pp. 288-297.
Androutsopoulos J., 2010. Localizing the Global on
the Participatory Web. The Handbook of
Language and Globalization, pp. 203-231.
Anisimov V.E., Borisova A.S., Konson G.R., 2019.
Lingvokulturnaya lokalizatsiya kinozagolovkov
[Linguocultural Localization of Movie Titles].
Vestnik Rossiyskogo universiteta druzhby
narodov. Seriya: Lingvistika [Russian Journal
of Linguistics], vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 435-459. DOI:
10.22363/2312-9182-2019-23-2-435-459.
Austermühl F., Mirwald C., 2010. Images of Translators
in Localization Discourse. T21N – Translation
in Transition. Trier, Wissenschaftlicher Verlag
Trier. 45 p.
Bassnett S., 2005. Bringing the News Back Home:
Strategies of Acculturation and Foreignisation.
Language and Intercultural Communication,
vol. 5 (2), pp. 120-130. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1080/14708470508668888.
Bernal M., 2006. On the Translation of Video Games.
The Journal of Specialized Translation, no. 6,
pp. 22-36.
Bielsa E., Bassnett S., 2009. Translation in Global
News. London, Routledge. 168 p.
Davier L., Van Doorslaer L., 2018. Translation Without
a Source Text: Methodological Issues in News
Translation? Across Languages and Cultures,
vol. 19 (2). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1556/
084.2018.19.2.6.
Dobrosklonskaya T.G., 2015. Modelirovanie
informatsionnykh protsessov v sovremennom
mediaprostranstve [Modeling of Information
Processes in Modern Media Space]. Vestnik
Moskovskogo universiteta. Seriya 10.
Zhurnalistika, no. 4, pp. 3-15.
Ergaliev K.S., Tekzhanov K.M., Asanbaeva E.B., 2014.
Funktsii gazetnogo zagolovka [Newspaper
Headline Functions]. Aktualnye problemy
gumanitarnykh i estestvennykh nauk, no. 3-2,
pp. 35-41.
Kalendr A.A., 2016. Mediynyy diskurs kak
preobrazovanie informatsii [Media Discourse as
Information Reconstruction]. Mir nauki,
kul’tury, obrazovaniya, no. 5 (60), pp. 326-329.
Kozhemyakin E.A., 2010. Massovaya kommunikatsiya
i mediadiskurs: k metodologii issledovaniya
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
53
O.I. Popova, I.D. Volkova, M.Yu. Fadeeva. Localization and Internationalization of Texts of the Media Discourse
[Mass Communication and Media Discourse:
Towards Methodology]. Nauchnye vedomosti
Belgorodskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta.
Seriya: Gumanitarnye nauki [Belgorod State
University Scientific Bulletin. Series Humanities],
no. 2 (73), iss. 11, pp. 13-21.
Madera M.G., 2018. Rol’ informatsionnykh agentstv v
sovremennykh 
sredstvakh 
massovoy
kommunikatsii [The Role of Information
Agencies in Modern Mass Media]. Diskurs
[Discourse], no. 4 (2), pp. 69-74. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.32603/2412-8562-2018-4-2-69-74.
Mityagina V.A., 2014. Perevod v formirovanii
turisticheskogo internet-diskursa [Translation in
Forming Tourist Internet Discourse]. Media- i
mezhkulturnaya kommunikatsiya v evropeyskom
kontekste: materialy Mezhdunarodnoy nauchno-
prakticheskoy konferentsii [Media and
Intercultural Communication in the European
Context: Proceedings of the International Scientific
and Practical Conference]. Stavropol, Izd-vo SKFU,
pp. 346-348.
Novikova E.Yu., 2017. Diskursivnaya lichnost
perevodchika: perevodcheskie kompetentsii i
rolevoy portret [Discursive Personality of the
Translator: Translation Competencies and Role
Portrait]. 
Vestnik 
Volgogradskogo
gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2.
Yazykoznanie [Science Journal of Volgograd State
University. Linguistics], vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 90-102.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2017.3.9.
Orengo A., 2005. Localising News: Translation and
the ‘Global-National’ Dichotomy. Language
and Intercultural Communication, vol. 5 (2),
pp. 168-187. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/
14708470508668892.
Prunì E., 2015. Puti razvitiya zapadnogo
perevodovedeniya. Ot yazykovoy asimmetrii k
politicheskoy [Ways of Development of
Western Translation Studies. From Linguistic
to Political Asymmetry]. Moscow, R.Valent Publ.
512 p.
Pym A., 2004. The Moving Text: Localization,
Translation, and Distribution. Amsterdam,
Philadelphia (PA), John Benjamins. 223 p.
Pym A., 2010. Exploring Translation Theories.
London, Routledge. 186 p.
Sandrini P., 2008. Localization and Translation. MuTra
Journal, vol. 2, pp. 167-191.
The Slator 2019 Language Service Provider Index.
URL: https://slator.com/data-research/the-
slator-2019-language-service-provider-index
(accessed 20 January 2021).
Voskoboynik G.D., Gorchakova E.Yu., 2014.
Mezhyazykovaya lokalizatsiya diskursa brenda:
domestikatsiya ili forenizatsiya? [Brand Discourse
Transcreation: Domesticising or Foreignising?].
Vestnik 
Irkutskogo 
gosudarstvennogo
lingvisticheskogo universiteta [The Bulletin of
Irkutsk State University], no. 1 (26), pp. 9-14.
SOURCES
Еда как угроза – Eda kak ugroza [Food as Threat].
RTD Documentary Channel. URL: https://
doc.rt.com/filmy/eda-kak-ugroza (accessed
20 January 2021).
Матыцин поддержал идею – Matytsin podderzhal
ideyu ispolzovat «Katyushu» v kachestve
gimna na OI [Matytsin Supported the Idea of
Using “Katyusha” as the Anthem at the Olympic
Games]. URL: https://russian.rt.com/sport/news/
822902-matycin-katyusha-gimn (accessed
31 January 2021).
Моя дикая семья – Moya dikaya semya [My Wild
Family]. RTD Documentary Channel. URL:
https://doc.rt.com/filmy/moya-dikaya-semya
(accessed 20 January 2021).
Путин заявил об угрозе – Veroyatnost stolknutsya s
nastoyashchim sryvom v mirovom razvitii: Putin
zayavil ob ugroze nachala borby «vsekh protiv
vsekh» [Likelihood of Facing a Real Disruption
in World Development: Putin Announced the
Threat of the Beginning of the “All Against All”
Struggle]. URL: https://russian.rt.com/world/
article/826394-putin-mir-ugroza-borba (accessed
27 January 2021).
«Русский путь» борьбы – National Review: russkiy
put borby s COVID-19 vpechatlyaet
inostrantsev [National Review: The “Russian
way” of Fighting COVID-19 Impresses
Foreigners]. InoTV. URL: https://russian.rt.com/
inotv/2021-01-18/National-Review-russkij-put-
borbi (accessed 20 January 2021).
Спасибо за мечту – Spasibo za mechtu. Kto segodnya
pomogaet veteranam VOV [Thank You for the
Dream. Who is Helping the Veterans of the Great
Patriotic War Today]. RTD Documentary
Channel. URL: https://doc.rt.com/filmy/spasibo-
za-mechtu (accessed 20 January 2021).
Умер Ларри Кинг – Umer Larri King [Larry King
Died]. URL: https://russian.rt.com/world/news/
825037-umer-larri-king (accessed 29 January
2021).
BI: отделить зёрна от плевел – BI: otdelit zerna ot
plevel  Natsgvardiya dopolnitelno proverit
svoikh soldat na blagonadezhnost pered
inauguratsiey [BI: Separate the Wheat from the
Chaff – The National Guard Is Doing
Background Checks on Its Own Soldiers to
Shore up Security During the Inauguration].
54
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
InoTV. URL: https://russian.rt.com/inotv/2021-01-
18/BI-otdelit-zyorna-ot-plevel (accessed
20 January 2021).
Décès du célèbre journaliste – Décès du célèbre
journaliste américain Larry King. URL: https:/
/francais.rt.com/international/83092-deces-
celebre-journaliste-americain-larry-kingord-
stream-2-construction-troncon-situe-eaux-
allemandes-terminee (accessed 29 January 2021).
How to Thank Heroes – How to Thank Heroes. RTD
Documentary Channel. URL: https://rtd.rt.com/
films/how-to-thank-heroes (accessed 20 January
2021).
L’Express – L’Express: za Marin Le Pen sobiraetsya
progolosovat rekordnoe chislo frantsuzov
[A Record Number of French are Going to Vote
for Marine Le Pen]. URL: https://russian.rt.com/
inotv/2021-01-28/LExpress-za-Marin-Le-Pen
(accessed 28 January 2021).
My Wild Family. RTD Documentary Channel. URL:
https://rtd.rt.com/films/wild-animal-rehab-is-a-
family-business-for-a-russian-couple (accessed
20 January 2021).
Poutine alerte sur le risque – Davos: Poutine alerte
sur le risque de «rupture» face à l’aggravation
des déséquilibres mondiaux. URL: https://
francais.rt.com/international/83225-davos-
poutine-alerte-sur-risque-rupture-face-
aggravation-desequilibres-mondiaux (accessed
27 January 2021).
Russia Has Its Own – Russia has Its Own (Very Russian)
Way of Dealing with COVID. National Review.
URL: https://www.nationalreview.com/2021/01/
russia-has-its-own-very-russian-way-of-dealing-
with-covid (accessed 20 January 2021).
Sondage – Sondage: Marine Le Pen et Emmanuel
Macron au coude-а-coude au second tour en
2022. URL: https://www.lexpress.fr/actualite/
politique/sondage-marine-le-pen-et-emmanuel-
macron-au-coude-a-coude-au-second-tour-en-
2022_2143639.html (accessed 28 January 2021).
The National Guard – The National Guard is Doing
Background Checks on Its Own Soldiers to Shore
up Security During the Inauguration. Business
Insider. URL: https://www.businessinsider.com/
national-guard-doing-background-checks-to-
weed-out-trump-supporters-2021-1 (accessed
20 January 2021).
The Peril on Your Plate. RTD Documentary Channel.
URL: https://rtd.rt.com/films/the-peril-on-your-
plate (accessed 20 January 2021).
Wegen Doping-Skandals – Wegen Doping-Skandals:
Russland will “Katjuscha” statt verbotener
Hymne bei Olympia singen. URL: https://de.rt.com/
russland/111934-wegen-doping-skandals-
russland-will (accessed 21 January 2021).
Information About the Authors
Olga I. Popova, Candidate of Sciences (Philology), Associate Professor, Department of Translation
Theory and Practice, Volgograd State University, Prosp. Universitetsky, 100, 400062 Volgograd, Russia,
olgapopovavlg@yandex.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9787-0317
Irina D. Volkova, Candidate of Sciences (Philology), Associate Professor, Department of Translation
Theory and Practice, Volgograd State University, Prosp. Universitetsky, 100, 400062 Volgograd, Russia,
romadina-irina@mail.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5718-9479
Marina Yu. Fadeeva, Candidate of Sciences (Philology), Associate Professor, Department of
Translation Theory and Practice, Volgograd State University, Prosp. Universitetsky, 100, 400062 Volgograd,
Russia, svinkina29@gmail.com, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5378-8848
Информация об авторах
Ольга Ильинична Попова, кандидат филологических наук, доцент кафедры теории и прак-
тики перевода, Волгоградский государственный университет, просп. Университетский, 100, 400062
г. Волгоград, Россия, olgapopovavlg@yandex.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9787-0317
Ирина Дмитриевна Волкова, кандидат филологических наук, доцент кафедры теории и
практики перевода, Волгоградский государственный университет, просп. Университетский, 100,
400062 г. Волгоград, Россия, romadina-irina@mail.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5718-9479
Марина Юрьевна Фадеева, кандидат филологических наук, доцент кафедры теории и
практики перевода, Волгоградский государственный университет, просп. Университетский, 100,
400062 г. Волгоград, Россия, svinkina29@gmail.com, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5378-8848
