Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
55
Guseynova I.A., Gorozhanov A.I., Kudinova E.S., 2021
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА

www.volsu.ru
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.5
UDC 81’25:35.077.535.6
Submitted: 14.12.2020
LBC 81.18
Accepted: 30.03.2021
TRANSLATION GENIUS AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
Innara A. Guseynova
Moscow State Linguistic University, Moscow, Russia
Alexey I. Gorozhanov
Moscow State Linguistic University, Moscow, Russia
Elena S. Kudinova
Moscow State Linguistic University, Moscow, Russia
Abstract. The paper attempts to consider changes in the translator’s activity caused by the turn towards
digital transformation in the institutional sphere. The analysis is based on material from German social networks,
their content being the subject matter for the modern translator who is a specialist in cross-cultural and cross-
lingual communication. The study describes the algorithm for implementing social management at the macrostructural
and compositional levels. The emphasis is also placed on the institutional spheres that are most susceptible to
digital transformation, which include nutrition and healthy lifestyle, education and many others. Total digital
transformation of these institutional spheres is primarily evidenced by an increase in neologisms recorded in
electronic databases, and dictionaries with an indication of their contextual use and their further popularization,
first of all, in mass media texts. The results of the analysis lead the authors to conclude that training a new
generation of interpreters and translators should include mastering the skill of working with big data, different
corpora of texts, neologisms marked by or containing the industry component, as well as the need to develop
glossary-type dictionaries for branches of knowledge. Considering the controversial content of social networks,
the authors of the paper come to the conclusion that it is necessary to develop the code of ethics for the social
networks translator.
Key words: institutional communication, cross-cultural communication, cross-lingual communication,
translation theory, translation practice, audiovisual content, digital transformation, social management tool.
Citation. Guseynova I.A., Gorozhanov A.I., Kudinova E.S. Translation Genius and Social Networks. Vestnik
Volgogradskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2. Yazykoznanie [Science  Journal  of  Volgograd  State
University. Linguistics], 2021, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 55-64. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.5
УДК 81’25:35.077.535.6
Дата поступления статьи: 14.12.2020
ББК 81.18
Дата принятия статьи: 30.03.2021
ГЕНИЙ ПЕРЕВОДЧИКА И СОЦИАЛЬНЫЕ СЕТИ
Иннара Алиевна Гусейнова
Московский государственный лингвистический университет, г. Москва, Россия
Алексей Иванович Горожанов
Московский государственный лингвистический университет, г. Москва, Россия
Елена Сергеевна Кудинова
Московский государственный лингвистический университет, г. Москва, Россия
56
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
Аннотация. В статье реализована попытка рассмотреть изменения в деятельности переводчиков,
вызванные поворотом к цифровой трансформации институциональной сферы. А.И. Горожановым прове-
ден анализ речевого материала немецких социальных сетей, содержание которых является предметом
изучения современного переводчика, специализирующегося на межкультурном и межъязыковом обще-
нии. Е.С. Кудиновой описан алгоритм реализации социального управления на макроструктурном и компо-
зиционном уровнях. Акцент сделан на институциональных сферах, наиболее подверженных цифровой транс-
формации (питание и здоровый образ жизни, образование и др.). Установлено, что о тотальной цифровой
трансформации этих институциональных сфер свидетельствует увеличение количества неологизмов, зафик-
сированных в электронных базах данных, словарях с указанием их контекстного использования, и их активная
воспроизводимость в текстах средств массовой информации. И.А. Гусейновой обобщены результаты иссле-
дования и сделан вывод о том, что подготовка устных и письменных переводчиков нового поколения должна
включать работу с большими данными, опираться на разные корпусы текстов, способствовать освоению
неологизмов, имеющих отраслевую составляющую; выявлена потребность переводчиков в словарях типа
глоссария по отраслям знаний. Учитывая неоднозначное содержание социальных сетей, авторы статьи аргу-
ментируют необходимость разработки этического кодекса переводчика социальных сетей.
Ключевые слова: институциональная коммуникация, межкультурная коммуникация, межъязыковая
коммуникация, теория перевода, практика перевода, аудиовизуальный контент, цифровая трансформация,
инструмент социального управления.
Цитирование. Гусейнова И. А., Горожанов А. И., Кудинова Е. С. Гений переводчика и социальные
сети // Вестник Волгоградского государственного университета. Серия 2, Языкознание. – 2021. – Т. 20,
№ 3. – С. 55–64. – (На англ. яз.). – DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.5
Introduction
Digital transformation has a significant
impact on various occupations, which, in terms of
translation activities, necessitates the exploration
of the following range of questions. First, it is
important to determine the impact of the global
turn towards digital transformation on experts in
cross-cultural and cross-lingual communication.
Secondly, we need to clarify the material the
modern translator will have to work with under
conditions of digital economy. Thirdly, it is
necessary to define efficient training of a new
generation of translators, ensuring their
comfortable work during digital transformation,
which primarily implies systematizing labor
functions of experts in cross-cultural and cross-
lingual communication.
Digital transformation calls for developing
interdisciplinary research bases that integrate
achievements of STEM and humanities, providing,
among other things, a correlation of linguistic and
mathematical knowledge [Amelkin, Ivanova,
2011]. A close look at various databases shows
their global and ubiquitous Anglo-Americanization,
which is naturally due to economic factors: the use
of English in computer-mediated communication
makes it possible for comprehensive cost saving
on the communicative-discourse continuum, from
teaching foreign languages in general and higher
education, to creating an institutional environment
in which professional interaction is carried out
through lingua franca, whose status has been
claimed by English for many decades, despite
other widely spoken languages, such as Russian,
Chinese, Arabic, Spanish, French, German and
others. Many foreign scholars also note that 80%
of scientific information is published in international
databases in English, while the remaining 20%
account for the other languages. This applies to
different areas of knowledge, including healthcare,
etc., compare: ‘First, the outcomes are presented
of our analysis of the Faculty of Medicine at
University of Münster (Germany). Figure 1
shows per year-block the total output of the
faculty (including papers in all languages),
and the output in English-language journal
publications only. The share of the latter is
about 80% of the former, which means that
20% of the output consists of non-English
language journal publications’ [Leeuwen et al.,
2001, p. 338]. The lingua franca status of British
and American English is largely observed in social
networks, which are dynamic in nature and can
absorb resources of different languages to solve
communication problems. For this reason, many
researchers deem it necessary to single out
Internet communication as a separate area of
research [Ashnin, 2015; Evtushenko, Pervukhina,
2020; Ibatova, Gromova, 2021; Karasik, 2012].
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
57
I.A. Guseynova, A.I. Gorozhanov, E.S. Kudinova. Translation Genius and Social Networks
We consider the scientific point of view of a
number of scientists to be very efficient, but we
believe it is important to conduct an analysis in a
broader vein, which will allow us to see future
development of virtual space, to identify possible
risks and dangers for sociocultural interaction in
the institutional sphere. We see high potential to
carry out an analysis based on the material of
widely spoken languages, which include both
Russian and German. With regard to the Russian
language of social networks, works of a plethora
of scientists should be noted [Klimanova,
Dembovskaya, 2013; Kolesnikov, 2018;
Kostomarov, 2019; Ovchinnikova, 2013; Saakyan,
2016]. As for German, the study of changes is
carried out mainly in Germany and Austria, which
is evidenced by modern publications on the
problem [Bedijs, Heyder, 2020; Dittler, Hoyer,
2014], while in Russian German studies, such work
is carried out mainly within the framework of
youth science – in bachelor’s and master’s theses.
Undoubtedly, achievements of Russian and foreign
German studies are presented in Russian scientific
series publications [Yazyk i moda, 2017], but their
fragmentary presence in the Anglo-American
scientific community makes German studies more
vulnerable, however, at the same time helps to
preserve its best traditions.
In our work, we will focus on interdisciplinary
scientific research carried out within the
framework of various projects implemented by
experts in German language and culture and based
on material of German social networks, which is
relevant for training experts in cross-cultural and
cross-lingual communication.
Results and discussion
Peculiarities of German social networks
It bears reminding that in modern linguistic
studies devoted to analysis of empirical facts taken
from social networks, attempts are constantly
being made to break down the virtual space into
genres [Mityagina, Sidorova, 2016; Tipologiya...,
2008]. This systematization is complicated by the
hybrid nature of Internet genres, as well as their
dynamic development across different platforms.
Despite the fact that the main networks are
considered to be Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp,
their language varies greatly. This is primarily due
to the fact that all social networks are oriented on
a specific target audience, in which certain
sociolinguistic parameters prevail – gender, age,
social status, gender, etc. The pragmatic aspect
has a significant impact on socio-communicative
practices, as well as on the macrostructure, or social
media content. However, it should be mentioned
that anonymization and pseudonymization make it
possible for people to be present in various social
networks and actively interact with social groups,
thereby leveling out all sociolinguistic parameters,
including gender, which we interpret, following the
majority of scholars, as the sociocultural gender
[Gorodnikova, 1999; 2002; Kostarnova, 2020]. It
is for this reason that many foreign researchers
reflect on the ‘postfeminist era’, which they
regard as the historical development of feminism,
or, what is more important to us, as part of modern
transformations, cf. English: ‘A contrasting
perspective regards postfeminism as an
historical shift within feminism, or as part of
its on-going transformation’ [Litosseliti, Gill,
Favaro, 2019, p. 4]. Gender transformations will
pose new challenges for practicing translators in
terms of specificity of particular languages.
Eliminating the gender factor in modern texts
often leads to the loss of gender identity and, at
the same time, to the popularization of gender
constructs in other linguocultures, where gender
is explicitly represented by the lexical and
grammatical means of the language itself – e.g.
the gender category in the language system and
structures, etc.
The global turn towards digital
transformation forced members of various ethnic
societies to dramatically reconsider their attitude
to objects and world phenomena, which was
reflected in discursive and communicative
practices in various professional spheres. At the
linguistic level, this manifested itself in the
widespread distribution in the German-speaking
community both in everyday and institutional
environment of the concept of ‘Lohas’, which in
terms of word formation in German, is an
abbreviation and goes back to ‘Lifestyle of Health
and Sustainability’ [Klosa-Kückelhaus,
Schnedermann, 2019, p. 22]. Obviously, such a
concept, rooted in the recipient’s collective
consciousness, will lead to changes in social
networks content, which, in turn, will result in an
increase in such nouns as ‘Veganer / Vegetarier’ –
58
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
a vegetarian, a person who consumes plants;
‘Frutarier’ is a person whose eating habits
include fruits, etc. The emergence of a corpus of
texts that address a healthy lifestyle will require
communication channels for their dissemination –
mass media, radio, television, etc. As a result, the
translator will have to know the relevant diet
programmes, 
foods 
recommended 
for
consumption, as well as patterns of generating
advertisements and video content. In addition, it
should be recalled that these concepts, in
accordance with the specificity of German, will
give rise to derivatives, for example,
‘Teilzeitvegetarier’. In the light of the above, in
relation to the translator’s profession, the role of
glossaries, both mono- and multilingual, will also
increase, which will include information about a
particular phenomenon that marks a healthy
lifestyle. To illustrate our point, let us consider the
following example: the concept of ‘Superfood’,
which arose no more than 10 years ago:
‘Superfood – Nahrungsmittel, dem besonders
viele Vitamine und andere wertvolle
Inhaltsstoffe und damit eine besondere
gesundheitsfördernde Wirkung zugeschrieben
wird’ [Klosa-Kückelhaus, Schnedermann, 2019,
p. 24]. Such an explanation makes it possible to
translate the concept of ‘Superfood’, and further
popularization of this good without adequate
representation in advertising or medical discourse
poses a challenge. As digital transformation
evolves, the lifestyle itself is changing, and in the
future, so is the social behavior of individuals, as
well as certain communities united by common
interests and preferences. For this reason, the
appearance of lexical units reflecting the new
reality across social networks should be expected.
In witness whereof, we will give specific
examples from German social networks:
‘Couchpotato / Couchkartoffel; Homing;
Cocooning’ [Klosa-Kückelhaus, 2020, pp. 1-2].
It is beyond argument that it is possible to reveal
the content of the abovementioned lexemes from
the point of view of translation practice only
through working with data corpuses and analyzing
the contextual use of the lexical units, which do
not mean potatoes at all (‘Couchpotato /
Couchkartoffel’), but refer to people who lead
a sedentary lifestyle and prefer to stay in for no
apparent reason or need, cf. German: ‘Mit diesen
Wörtern werden Menschen bezeichnet, die ihre
Freizeit vorzugweise sitzend verbringen’
[Klosa-Kückelhaus, 2020, p. 1]. Homing should
be interpreted as remaining indoors, where the
home is seen as a center for organizing one’s
leisure time, cf. German: ‘Zuhause als
Mittelpunkt der Freizeitgestaltung’ [Klosa-
Kückelhaus, 2020, p. 2]. Cocooning is nothing
more than a desire to isolate oneself from the
outside world, to ‘wrap in a cocoon’. From this
perspective, we should talk about the socio-
communicative elements of the translator’s
professional discourse and socio-communicative
strategies [Naumova, 2013], which help to take
into account the creative initiative in the
translator’s practice, which is objectified through
the use of various linguistic means, which at the
same time bring out the translator’s individuality.
Social networks, due to the variety of content
broadcast through various communication
channels, require the modern translator to make
well-grounded, not so much translation decisions,
as ideological, philosophical and pragmatic
decisions, which will make it possible to create
the final translation taking into account the
specificity of the social services commissioning
by enterprises and companies that offer digital
services.
Social networks as a tool
for managing social reality
The fact of managing real ethnosociety
through social networks is objectified at the
linguistic level. Let’s turn to specific examples
in German: ‘mailen, anmailen, simsen, bloggen,
posten, 
skypen, 
whatsappen’ 
[Klosa-
Kückelhaus, Schnedermann, 2019, p. 46], cf.
Russian: ‘писать по электронной почте,
направлять смс-сообщение, размещать
пост / постировать, вести блог, выходить
на связь через скайп, общаться по вотсап-
пу’. At first glance, we are talking about lexemes
that mark Internet communication. However, a
more profound analysis of lexical units, using
sociolinguistic research methods, elements of
content analysis, theory of discourse and
communication allows us to come to the following
conclusion: not only do units ‘mailen, bloggen,
twittern’ express communication technologies that
serve mediated communication, but they also
define the sociolinguistic parameters of group
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
59
I.A. Guseynova, A.I. Gorozhanov, E.S. Kudinova. Translation Genius and Social Networks
communities. The technical channel for
disseminating and transmitting information, helps
determine the social status, sociocultural level, job
functions, the level of information competence of
the participant in virtual communication. In this
light, the activities of an interpreter and translator
become more complicated, because to adequately
translate the content of social networks, they
unwittingly have to consider the sociolinguistic
parameters ‘wired’ in information communication
channels – blog, twitter, whatsapp, etc.
Also complicated becomes an interpreter’
and a translator’s work which is affected by the
‘shift’ towards imagery and visualization. As a
result, this shift pushes the verbal mode to the
background. The decrease in verbal descriptions
enhances the emotional component, which results
in the use of emoticons that indicate the attitude
and assessment of the subject of communication
by participants in virtual interaction [Provine,
Spencer, Mandell, 2007]. This is especially
noticeable in the summary of comments in
German in such genres as talk shows, interviews
and other entertainment formats. Simplification
of verbal content takes communication to an
emotional level, which makes it possible to
determine the parameters of the target audience
quickly and with a high degree of accuracy, which
is important for marketing in all economic sectors.
In written cross-cultural and cross-lingual
communication, this gives rise to emoticons with
a steadily growing repertoire. There is no need to
interpret emoticons, but it does not rule out the
linguistic and cultural or linguocultural
commentary in translation, which is essential to
consider while training future translators [Mityagina,
Gureeva, 2017].
Social group management is also
implemented at the macrostructural level. The
analysis of some popular German social networks
demonstrates the subject matter of issues under
discussion. These are transformations taking
place in schooling and higher education, cf.
German: ‘Veränderungen im Schul- und
Hochschulwesen’; search of a life partner, cf.
German: ‘Partnersuche’; new team-building
computer games, cf. German: ‘Neue Teamspiele’
[Klosa-Kückelhaus, Schnedermann, 2019, p. 24].
All thematic groups are characterized by certain
key words, which function as a social signal for
the mainstream recipient who is interested in
taking part in communication on a particular topic.
These keywords also perform a password
function. Their regular use forms the ‘profile’ of
a member of a given social group, and the data
helps to establish the communicant’s interests –
his taste preferences, emotional states, mood, etc.
In other words, the data helps to define the
sociocultural profile of a member of this social
group, which is inclusive of common features. For
the modern interpreter / translator, this means
mastering the key words that mark communication
on an issue. If the terminology base can be isolated
through text corpora and methods of corpus-based
and corpus-driven linguistics, working with social
networks requires knowledge of passwords –
professional terms, heritage language lexemes,
dialectisms and other linguistic means. Otherwise,
the translator runs the risk of making
communicative-pragmatic blunders.
Social networks are also managed at the
compositional level. After all, the format of each
social network has its given parameters that must
be implemented by all participants in group
communication, and at the same time it is supported
by the structural elements of the pre-set
communication genre. Failure to comply with certain
compositional requirements leads to the fact that
the participant of the social network stands in stark
contrast to the rest of the group members, thus
eliciting different reactions from other participants.
This feedback is often critical, which causes
discomfort and the group member either obeys the
general rules or is forced to leave the
communication group. The abovementioned
circumstances stimulate genre forms of Internet
communication. At the moment, we can single out
social groups that prefer communication in such
genres as blog, chat, news, etc. According to
observations of German researchers, social
networks are going through the following trend:
each participant entering into indirect
communication relies not on the topic, but on
comments posted earlier. In other words, we are
talking about forming space in which other people’s
opinion is ignored, which is due to the attempt of
new participants to ‘fit’ into the established format.
Translation of social network content lead to the
translator involuntarily becoming a ‘hostage’ of the
formats, which leads to his emotional workload,
which in some cases reduces the qualitative and
quantitative indicators of his activity. Realizing that
60
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
there is another message behind the statement, the
translator adheres to the pre-set composition.
Social networks are also managed at the
institutional level. Examples are the regular
surveys conducted in Germany collecting
information about the attitude of Germans to the
state of the German language, as well as the
attitude of members of the German-speaking
community to other foreign languages and
cultures. According to German scholars, the
interest in the status of German, both in Germany
and abroad, is on the rise, which necessitates
regular sociolinguistic surveys. Among various
questions addressing the dialect proficiency of
German native speakers, the areas of their use in
day-to-day communication etc., special mention
goes to two key themes: 1) the attitude of
Germans to the German language; 2) the attitude
of Germans to other (foreign) languages, which
are used for various reasons in Germany. With
regard to the first key question, survey participants
emphasize the need to comply with the spelling
rules, and to take into account the gender factor,
cf. German: ‘Geschlechtsgerechte Sprache’
[Adler, Ribeiro Silveira, 2020, p. 22]. The survey
results regarding the second key question specify
that French, English, Italian and Spanish are
‘attractive’ for the Germans, cf. German: ‘Als
sympathische Sprachen werden insbesondere
Französisch, Englisch, Italienisch und
Spanisch genannt’ [Adler, Ribeiro Silveira, 2020,
p. 19]. The ‘unattractive’ languages’ in the
German-speaking community include Polish,
Russian, Turkish and Arabic, cf. German: ‘eher
nicht sympathisch bewertet werden dagegen
Polnisch, Russisch, Türkisch und Arabisch’
[Adler, Ribeiro Silveira, 2020, p. 19]. It is beyond
argument that the division of languages into
‘attractive’ and ‘unattractive’ is provisional, but
it stimulates the study of cultural, historical, socio-
political and other reasons for such an attitude
towards specific languages. In the light of the
institutional management of social networks, the
abovementioned facts are of prime importance,
as they draw attention to language policy in the
context of migration, to globalization results and to
imbuing virtual space with relevant content. To this
effect, translator training requires considering
theoretical modules that contribute to encyclopedic
world knowledge, which is essential for the success
of cross-cultural and cross-lingual communication.
In summary it can be said that for the
modern translator should enhance her professional
theoretical and practical training. Working with
content involves managing big data, corpora of
texts and making use of a certain thematic group
of words, including units of special vocabulary,
terminology, professional terms, emotive units,
etc., i.e. the comprehensive set of linguistic means
that is crucial to convey the meanings and
information in the native or foreign language. In the
professional community, a translator will be
defined as an expert in a particular subject area
and branch of knowledge.
Functions of social media translator
or traps lurking for the modern translator’s /
interpreter’s genius
In modern sociolinguistic publications, the
term ‘vitality’ of languages is increasingly
introduced into scientific context. In this sense, it
seems appropriate to mention two types of vitality:
linguistic and sociolinguistic. Russian authors
define the linguistic vitality of a language as ‘the
ability for constant linguistic innovation, which
manifests itself in reactions to external
influences arising from contacts with other
languages 
(both 
majoritarian 
and
minoritarian 
languages)’ 
[Bogdanov,
Marusenko M.A., Marusenko N.M., 2020,
p. 316]. Sociolinguistic vitality does not so much
define the ability ‘to adapt and develop the
lexical-semantic and grammatical systems, but
as the will (or strength) of the linguistic
community to transmit its language or
language variant to the next generations’
[Bogdanov, Marusenko M.A., Marusenko N.M.,
2020, p. 316]. Digital transformations, while
affecting languages, at the same time ‘check’ the
degree of their vitality, resistance to external
influences. To illustrate the phenomenon of
language resistance used in German social
networks, let us examine the results of our
observations, which directly relate to the
translator’s activity and present certain challenges
for her.
Neologisms. German social networks are
characterized by the use of verbs containing the
components ‘fremd’ and ‘gegen’, cf. German:
‘Fremd-Verben’ und ‘Gegen-Verben’ [Müller-
Spitzer, Ribeiro-Silveira, 2019, p. 16]. Among
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
61
I.A. Guseynova, A.I. Gorozhanov, E.S. Kudinova. Translation Genius and Social Networks
them, there are lexical units that pose a certain
difficulty for the translator, for example,
‘fremdschämen’ and ‘fremdevaluieren’. In
reference editions, these verbs are not listed,
which leads to the translator looking for possible
translation options either in corpuses or in
electronic glossary-type dictionaries explaining
their meaning, since even native speakers are not
always ready to immediately provide an everyday
definition of these lexemes. Nevertheless, the verb
‘fremdschämen’, which is quite popular in
German social networks, is interpreted as ‘feeling
ashamed for any words and actions committed
by third parties’, and the verb ‘fremdevaluieren’
is a term found in the field of pedagogy, and it can
be translated as ‘carrying out an independent
diagnosis’.
Content stylization according to tastes
and preferences of social groups. The analysis
of German social networks reveals certain trends
in the use of grammatical means. So, in the course
of the analysis of the ‘weil / denn’ connectors on
Facebook, it was found that age characteristics
play a significant role in their use – ‘weil’ is used
at a more mature age, while the use of ‘denn’ is
typical for schoolchildren, for example, in essays,
cf. German: ‘Die Studie legt nahe, dass in
Facebook-Texten eine Präferenz für den
Konnektor weil vorliegt, wohingegen in Texten
von Schüler / -innen häufiger denn verwendet
wird’ [Bröcher, Herzberg, 2019, p. 5]. In addition,
Facebook discourse is defined by independent
sentences that begin with the conjunction word
‘weil’, although according to the rules of German
grammar, the word ‘da’ is used at the beginning
of a sentence, and a subordinate clause without
the main clause is not used independently. This
knowledge is crucial for the translator working
with social networks, since it is these little things
that testify to his professionalism.
Acceptance or non-acceptance of
conventions and rules dictated by the
employer at the institutional level. Not only
does stepwise management of social networks
require a high level of translation competence, but
also compliance with the translator’s code of
ethics and rules for the translator’s work with
content. In this sense, the legal and ethical aspects
of a translator’s work is subject to further analysis
and will require reviewing many rules and
regulations that maintain interaction and dialogue
between the machine (computer) and a human
being, as well as taking into account new formats
of work caused by the global turn towards digital
transformation.
Recognizing post-feminist culture
phenomena. Due to the fact that translators work
with languages of different structure, and
complete coincidence is a rather rare phenomenon
in cognate languages, there arises the question of
conveying the gender factor, which is blurred in
virtual space or is impossible to recognize, since
the participants in group communication use
pseudonyms or hide their gender identity.
Anonymity makes it possible to form pseudo-
identity, which undoubtedly complicates
translation, given grammatical differences in
languages. The technologies of working with
gender constructs in the linguistic aspect in the
time of digital transformation are still poorly
understood, which does not yet help us to give
any recommendations that could be taken into
account in interpreter and translator training.
Conclusion
This paper touches upon only part of the
problems that directly relate to interpreter and
translator training, their professional competence,
and work in the time of digital transformation.
However, today it is necessary to consider
incorporating work with neologisms in the theory
and practice of translation, compiling glossary-
type dictionaries, working with various databases,
which make it possible to reveal the meaning of
new words that mark changes in everyday life
and institutional spheres. The digital
transformation of a translator’s activity poses a
challenge to his genius, but at the same time
requires institutional support, for example, the
development of a social media translator’s code
of ethics. We believe that training to analyze the
facts of postfeminist culture is both forward-
looking and crucial.
REFERENCES
Adler 
A., 
Ribeiro 
Silveira 
M., 
2020.
Spracheinstellungen in Deutschland – Was die
Menschen in Deutschland über Sprache denken.
IDS Sprachreport, vol. 36, iss. 4, pp. 16-24. DOI:
10.14618/sr-4-2020-adl.
62
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
Amelkin S.А., Ivanova О.S., 2011. Predelnye
vozmozhnosti peredachi informatsii v
makrosistemakhc [Limiting Possibilities of
Transmission of Information in an Economic
Macrosystem]. Modelirovanie i analiz
informatsionnykh sistem [Modeling and
Analysis of Information Systems], vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 75-81.
Ashnin Е.S., 2015. Metaforicheskaya reprezentatsiya
mentalnykh operatsiy subyekta v yazyke
nemetskoy 
molodezhi 
[Metaphorical
Representation of the Subject’s Mental
Operations in the Language of German Youth].
Vestnik Volgogradskogo gosudarstvennogo
universiteta. Seriya 2. Yazykoznaniye [Science
Journal of Volgograd State University.
Linguistics], no. 1 (25), pp. 125-133. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2015.1.14.
Bedijs K., Heyder K.H., 2020. Sprache und Personen
im Web 2.0. Hildesheimer Beiträge zur
Medienforschung, Band 1, Münster, Lit
Varlag. 176 p.
Bogdanov S.I., Marusenko M.A., Marusenko N.M.,
2020. Yazykovye perepisi i monitoringi kak
instrument natsionalnoi i yazykovoi politiki
[Language Censuses and Monitoring as a Tool
of National and Language Policy], Saint
Petersburg, Rossiyskiy gosudarstvennyy
pedagogicheskiy universitet im. A. I. Gertsena.
343 p.
Bröcher L., Herzberg L., 2019. Deutsch in sozialen
Medien. Interaktiv – multimodal – vielfältig:
Bericht von der 55. Jahrestagung des Leibnitz-
Instituts für deutsche Sprache, Mannheim, 12-
14. März 2019. IDS Sprachreport, vol. 35, iss. 2,
pp. 2-8.
Dittler U., Hoyer M., 2014. Social Network – Die Revolution
der Kommunikation. Kundenkommunikation,
Facebook-Freundschaften, digitale Demokratie
und 
virtuelle 
Shitstorms 
unter
medienpsychologischer und mediensoziologischer
Perspektive. München, kopaed. 341 p.
Evtushenko О.А., Pervukhina S.V., 2020. Elektronnyi
modus sovremennogo administrativnogo
diskursa [Electronic Mode of the Modern
Administrative 
Discourse]. 
Vestnik
volgogradskogo 
gosudarstvennogo
universiteta. Seriya 2. Yazykoznaniye [Science
Journal of Volgograd State University.
Linguistics], vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 99-109. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2020.5.9.
Gorodnikova M.D., 1999. Gendernyi faktor i
raspredelenie sotsialnykh rolei v sovremennom
obshchestve: Na materiale brachnykh obyavlenii
[Gender and the Distribution of Social Roles in
Modern Society: Based on the Material of
Marriage Announcements]. Gendernyi faktor v
yazyke i kommunikatsii: sb. nauch. tr. [Gender
Factor in Language and Communication:
Collection of Scientific Papers], Moscow, Rema
Publ., pp. 36-44.
Gorodnikova M.D., 2002. Gender v kommunikativnoi
interaktsii [Gender in Communicative Interaction].
Gender: yazyk, kultura, kommunikatsiya:
doklady Vtoroi mezhdunarodnoi konferentsii
[Gender: Language, Culture, Communication:
Reports of the 2nd International Conference],
Moscow, MGLU, pp. 70-76.
Ibatova A., Gromova A., 2021. Intercultural Features
of Non-Verbal Means of Communication Used
in Internet Communication. Applied Linguistics
Research Journal, vol. 5, iss. 1, pp. 101-108. DOI:
10.14744/alrj.2021.98215.
Karasik V.I., 2012. Kompyuternaya igra «StarCraft»:
lingvokulturnye kharakteristiki [Computer Game
“StarCraft”: Linguocultural Characteristics].
Internet-kommunikatsiya 
kak 
novaya
rechevaya formatsiya [Internet Communication
as a New Speech Formation], Moscow, Flinta
Publ. 328 p.
Klimanova L., Dembovskaya S., 2013. L2 Identity,
Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian.
Language Learning & Technology, vol. 17, iss. 1,
pp. 69-88.
Klosa-Kückelhaus A., 2019. Bloggst du noch oder
twitterst du schon? (Aus der Rubrik: Neuer
Wortschatz. IDS Sprachreport, vol. 35, iss. 4,
pp. 46-49.
Klosa-Kückelhaus A., 2020. Von Nichtstun und
Erholung (An Weihnachten und zu anderen
Zeiten) (aus der Rubrik Neuer Wortschatz). IDS
Sprachreport, vol. 36, iss. 4, pp. 1-5. DOI:
10.14618/sr-4-2020-klosa.
Klosa-Kückelhaus A., Schnedermann T., 2019. Sind
Sie auch schon ein Lohas? (aus der Rubrik Neuer
Wortschatz). IDS Sprachreport, vol. 35, iss. 3.
pp. 22-25.
Kolesnikov A.E., 2018. Yazyk seti internet i
amerikanizatsiya russkogo yazyka [The
Language of the Internet and the
Americanization of the Russian Language].
Molodoy uchenyy, no. 20 (206), pp. 446-448.
Kostarnova О.S., 2020. Gendernye aspekty
sovremennoy bytovoy italyanskoi skazki
[Gender Aspects of the Modern Domestic
Italian Tale]. Nauka bez granits: sinergiya
teorii, metodov i praktik: materialy
Mezhdunarodnoi nauchnoi konferentsii
[Science Without Borders: Synergy of Theory,
Methods and Practice: Proceedings of the
International Scientific Conference], Moscow,
MGLU, pp. 515-518.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
63
I.A. Guseynova, A.I. Gorozhanov, E.S. Kudinova. Translation Genius and Social Networks
Kostomarov V.G., 2019. O displeinykh tekstakh
[About Display Texts]. Russkiy yazyk za
rubezhom [Russian Language Abroad],
no. 1 (272), pp. 61-64.
Leeuwen Van Th.N., Moed H.F., Tijssen R.J.W.,
Visser M.S., Raan Van A.F.J., 2001. Language Biases
in the Coverage of the Science Citation Index and
its Consequences of International Comparisions
of National Research Performance. Scientometrics.
Leiden, Leiden University, vol. 51, pp. 335-346. DOI:
10.1023/A:1010549719484.
Litosseliti L., Gill R., Favaro L.G., 2019. Postfeminism
as a Critical Tool for Gender and Language Study.
Gender and Language, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1-22.
DOI: 10.1558/genl.34599.
Mityagina V.A., Gureeva А.А., 2017. Kommunikativnaya
kompetentsiya perevodchika v epokhu
global’nogo informatsionnogo prostranstva [The
Communicative Competence of a Translator in
the Era of the Global Information Space]. Yazyk i
lichnost v garmonichnom dialoge kultur:
materialy 
Mezhdunarodnoi 
nauchnoi
konferentsii [Language and Personality in a
Harmonious Dialogue of Cultures: Proceedings
of the International Scientific Conference],
Stavropol, Paragraph Publ., pp. 325-329.
Mityagina V.A., Sidorova I.G., 2016. Zhanry personalnogo
Internet-diskursa: kommunikativnye eksplikatsii
lichnosti [The Genres of the Personal Internet
Discourse: Communicative Explications of a
Person]. Zhanry rechi [Speech Genres], no. 2 (14),
pp. 106-115. DOI: 10.18500/2311-0740-2016-2-14-
106-115.
Müller-Spitzer C., Ribeiro-Silveira M., 2019.
Fremdschämen muss sich jeder Mal, aber haben
Sie schon einmal von Fremdpflegen oder
Fremdküssen gehört? Eine Studie zur
Akzeptabilität und zum Neologismenstatus von
Fremd-Verben. IDS Sprachreport, vol. 35, iss. 3,
pp. 16-21.
Naumova А.P., 2013. Institutsional’nost’
professional’nogo diskursa perevodchikov
[Institutionality of Professional Translators’
Discourse]. 
Vestnik 
Volgogradskogo
gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2.
Yazykoznaniye [Science Journal of Volgograd
State University. Linguistics], no. 2 (18),
pp. 104-109.
Ovchinnikova I.G., 2013. Kommunikatsiya i
identifikatsiya v sotsialnykh setyakh: faktory,
tipazhi, natsionalno-kulturnaya spetsifika (na
materiale sotsialnoi seti twitter) [Communication
and Identification in Social Networks: Factors,
Types, Ethnic and Cultural Specifics (Based on
the Material of the Social Network Twitter)].
Vestnik Permskogo universiteta. Politologiya
[Bulletin of Perm University. Political Science],
no. 2 (22), pp. 143-156.
Provine R.R., Spencer R.J., Mandell D.L., 2007.
Emotional Expression Online – Emoticons
Punctuate Website Text Messages. Journal of
Language and Social Psychology, vol. 26, iss. 3,
pp. 299-307. DOI: 10.1177/0261927X06303481.
Saakyan L.N., 2016. Novye media: yazyk smi i
sotsial’nykh setei [New Media: the Language
of the Mass Media and Social Networks].
Russkiy yazyk za rubezhom [Russian Language
Abroad], no. 4 (257), pp. 93-99.
Tipologiya tekstov novogo vremeni [Typology of
Texts of Modern Times], 2008. Ezhegodnik
Rossiyskogo soyuza germanistov [Yearbook of
the Russian Union of Germanists]. Moscow,
Yazyki slavyanskoy kul’tury, vol. 5. 403 p.
Yazyk i moda [Language and Fashion], 2017. Collection
of articles. Moscow. 166 p. (Series: Theory and
History of Linguistics).
64
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
Information About the Authors
Innara A. Guseynova, Doctor of Sciences (Philology), Professor, Department of German Language
Lexicology and Stylistics, Moscow State Linguistic University, Ostozhenka St, 38, 119034 Moscow, Russia,
ginnap@mail.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6544-699X
Alexey I. Gorozhanov, Doctor of Sciences (Philology), Professor, Department of German Language
Grammar and History, Moscow State Linguistic University, Ostozhenka St, 38, 119034 Moscow, Russia,
a_gorozhanov@mail.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2280-1282
Elena S. Kudinova, Candidate of Sciences (Philology), Associate Professor, Head of the Department
of English as a Second Foreign Language, Moscow State Linguistic University, Ostozhenka St, 38, 119034
Moscow, Russia, e.kudinova@linguanet.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9967-6443
Информация об авторах
Иннара Алиевна Гусейнова, доктор филологических наук, профессор кафедры лексиколо-
гии и стилистики немецкого языка, Московский государственный лингвистический университет,
ул. Остоженка, 38, 119034 г. Москва, Россия, ginnap@mail.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6544-699X
Алексей Иванович Горожанов, доктор филологических наук, профессор кафедры граммати-
ки и истории немецкого языка, Московский государственный лингвистический университет, ул. Осто-
женка, 38, 119034 г. Москва, Россия, a_gorozhanov@mail.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2280-1282
Елена Сергеевна Кудинова, кандидат филологических наук, доцент, заведующая кафедрой
английского языка как второго, Московский государственный лингвистический университет, ул. Ос-
тоженка, 38, 119034 г. Москва, Россия, e.kudinova@linguanet.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9967-6443
