Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
151
Prokofeva N.A., Akulovich I.A., 2021
МАТЕРИАЛЫ И СООБЩЕНИЯ

www.volsu.ru
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.13
UDC 81’42:004.738.5
Submitted: 21.02.2020
BBC 81.055.51.5
Accepted: 01.12.2020
THE LANGUAGE MEANS OF COMICALITY IN CLICKBAIT HEADINGS 1
Natalia A. Prokofeva
Saint Petersburg State University, Saint Petersburg, Russia
Irina A. Akulovich
Saint Petersburg State Electrotechnical University “LETI”, Saint Petersburg, Russia;
Saint Petersburg State University, Saint Petersburg, Russia
Abstract. The analysis of material presented in the media discourse demonstrates significant changes in
the intentionality of the journalistic text, which are reflected in establishing contacts so as to grab and retain the
reader’s attention. This feature of modern media text is represented in changing genre preferences, speech
tactics and strategies, and, consequently, selecting and combining linguistic means. One of the manifestations
of this trend is the phenomenon of clickbait, which is a communicative act of promising to continue communication.
This article is dedicated to the clickbait with the semantics of comicality. The collected from the Russian-
language Internet research material includes clickbait headings that promise a certain funny content. The study
revealed that a clickbait model includes the following semantic components: a stimulating utterance of the
subject of speech seeking to involve the reader in the humorous nature of hypertext; the verbal and non-verbal
markers of the object of laughter; markers, which reflect Internet user’s involvement in the communicative act.
The analysis of relationship between the components of a clickbait model resulted in specifying four types of
clickbait headlines: 1) narrative headlines, which invite the reader to laugh what some other readers have already
laughed at; 2) offering headlines suggesting some comic entertainment; 3) allusive clickbaits that hint on the
possibility to continue amusing reading; 4) nominative clickbaits, which name the expected laughing reaction to
the presentation of some objects.
Key words: clickbait, comicality, media text, semantics, speech act.
Citation. Prokofeva N.A., Akulovich I.A. The Language Means of Comicality in Clickbait Headings. Vestnik
Volgogradskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2. Yazykoznanie [Science  Journal  of  Volgograd  State
University. Linguistics], 2021, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 151-165. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.13
УДК 81’42:004.738.5
Дата поступления статьи: 21.02.2020
ББК 81.055.51.5
Дата принятия статьи: 01.12.2020
ЯЗЫКОВЫЕ СРЕДСТВА КОМИЧЕСКОГО В КЛИКБЕЙТЕ 1
Наталья Анатольевна Прокофьева
Санкт-Петербургский государственный университет, г. Санкт-Петербург, Россия
Ирина Анатольевна Акулович
Санкт-Петербургский государственный электротехнический университет «ЛЭТИ»
им. В.И. Ульянова (Ленина), г. Санкт-Петербург, Россия
Санкт-Петербургский государственный университет, г. Санкт-Петербург, Россия
Аннотация. Анализ современного речевого материала, представленного в медиапространстве, де-
монстрирует значительные изменения интенциональности журналистского текста. На первый план выхо-
дит интенция контактоустановления – захвата внимания читателя и стремление его не упустить. Эта осо-
бенность современного медиатекста реализуется в изменении жанровых предпочтений, особенностей
152
МАТЕРИАЛЫ И СООБЩЕНИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
речевых тактик и стратегий, а следовательно, отбора и сочетания языковых средств. Одним из проявлений
указанной тенденции становится распространение кликбейта – коммуникативного акта обещания продол-
жить коммуникацию. Статья посвящена кликбейтам с семантикой комического. Материалом исследова-
ния послужили кликбейты в русскоязычной сети, содержащие обещание смешного. Выявлено, что модель
кликбейта включает следующие смысловые компоненты: стимулирующая реплика субъекта речи, стремя-
щегося вовлечь в смеховую стихию гипертекста; речевые и невербальные маркеры объекта смеха; марке-
ры, отражающие учет присутствия пользователя в коммуникации. В ходе анализа отношений между ком-
понентами модели кликбейта выделены четыре типа: 1) заголовки-нарративы, включающие приглашение
читателю посмеяться над тем, над чем уже посмеялись ранее; 2) заголовки-оферты, содержащие предло-
жение смешного; 3) кликбейты-аллюзии, выражающие намек на возможность продолжения забавного
чтения; 4) кликбейты-номинативы, называющие ожидаемую смеховую реакцию на представление каких-
то объектов.
Ключевые слова: кликбейт, комическое, медиатекст, семантика, речевой акт.
Цитирование. Прокофьева Н. А., Акулович И. А. Языковые средства комического в кликбейте // Вестник
Волгоградского государственного университета. Серия 2, Языкознание. – 2021. – Т. 20, № 3. – С. 151–165. –
(На англ. яз.). – DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.13
Introduction
The hypertext in the news is composed due
to the use of multiple means of intertextual linkings,
including catchy headlines as if they are some
toutings made during the fairs. Such catchy
headlines attract reader’s attention by promising
some cheerful and amusing time spent together and
bringing a pleasant sense of belonging. Through
referring to obscenities, such preview headlines
provide for endless surfing in the web space. Such
hypertext toutings make a victim of every user
clicking on boldly announced promises, looking
through some garbage websites that lack any
valuable information (created, in the first place, to
hide some advertising links leading to commercial
websites) (comp.: [Daoud, El-Seoud, 2019]).
When browsing the Internet, Internet-users
often look for attractive form rather than for
interesting and informative content. That is the
reason why the phenomenon of clickbait is
nowadays associated with senseless headlines, so-
called fake headings and captions used as “hooks”.
Clickbaiting appeared in social networks in the
form of blog headlines [Potthast et al., 2016], and
today it is often found in entertaining, analytical
and news media discourse.
Clickbaits are considered a means of
falsifying information [Al Asaad, Erascu, 2018;
Chanysheva, 2016; Gavrikova, 2018c; Serrano,
Romero-Rodríguez, Gómez, 2018; Shu et al.,
2018; Vol’skaia, 2018]. We should note that daily
routine is presented in a clickbait in such a light
that makes it look worse than in reality [Molyneux,
Coddington, 2019]. Therefore, the quality of news
presenting is getting lower: more attention is paid
to the presentation form rather than the content,
clickbait’s author intentionally gives an impression
that readers are directly involved with the content
of the message [Geckil et al., 2018; Gavrikova,
2018b; Agrawal, 2016], though, in reality, the
article’s content has nothing to do with the topic
implied in the headline. Clickbaits are often placed
on a par with spam messages (based on YouTube
data) [Gavrikova, 2018a; Zannettou et al., 2018].
Last years have seen a lot of posts suggesting
that we should get rid of clickbaiting. In this
regard, scientists create various kinds of models
to identify the headlines that mislead readers. The
material that we provide shows that some comic
tools are used in clickbaits to attract attention
[Gajda, Brzozowska (eds.), 2000; Vasileva, 2017].
Today’s Internet discourse ridicules everything:
something comic is seen in miserable, sloppy,
disgusting and even beautiful things. In clickbaits,
the comic becomes a universally used “hook” to
fully involve readers in viewing the content that
the clickbaits creators want to make attractive.
The subject of any clickbait relies on user
activity of readers, provoking their interest in the
further reading of texts and some kind of a game,
entertainment within a communication act by
means of making readers laugh because of the
information being “touted”.
Entertainment is one of the main functions
of the media text, therefore, the laughing reaction
caused by reading and, as a result, the relief of
social tension can be considered as one of the
forms of communication in the media space sought
after by the authors (see Fig. 1).
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
153
N.A. Prokofeva, I.A. Akulovich. The Language Means of Comicality in Clickbait Headings
Clickbait pragmatic implication is to promise
communication with some content to further
entertain and amuse. The purpose of this article
is to describe the common structural patterns of
clickbait headlines that use comic tools.
Based on V.V. Vinogradov’s [Vinogradov,
1959] thought about the mutual determination of
form and content, it can be assumed that the listed
features of the functionality inherent to clickbaits
are reflected in their verbal component: in special
marker words, in the syntactic structure, in the
semantic connotations. This characteristic of
clickbait becomes the main objective of the
research and entails a number of tasks.
The purpose of this article is to describe the
constituency of common structural patterns of
clickbait headlines that use comic verbal and
nonverbal tools, which requires the search of
those clickbaits that make use of comic tools to
link the content of the texts they provide with the
headlines, finding language markers of comicality
(such as referring to precedent phenomena, using
of aposiopesis, the reduction of a statement to
absurdity, the inclusion of contradictory
information, intentional informational emptiness,
playing on the verge of a foul) installed into the
headlines as well as to work out some
classification of utterances and other markers of
comicality promises in media content. All these
techniques act to form the effect of heightened
anticipation in the headline-text system.
The studies of clickbaits have started most
recently. By various estimates, the word
“clickbait” appeared at the end of the 90s of the
previous century, or even at the 10s of this one
[Ageeva, Smyshliaeva, 2019; Molyneux,
Coddington, 2019]. Scientifical interest in this
phenomenon is stipulated by the active spread of
online communication, its characteristic
phenomena [Brzozowska, 2013] as well as the
reaction to such a spread expressed by online
communication participants.
Headlines perceived as so-called “toutings”
were named “clickbaits”, and due to their getting
widely spread all over the world, now they raise
genuine interest of the scientists from all over the
world [Al Asaad, Erascu, 2018; Anand,
Chakraborty, Park, 2017; Fu et al., 2017;
Gavrikova, 2018a; Serrano, Romero-Rodríguez,
Gómez, 2018; Sladkevich, 2019; Vol’skaia, 2018;
Wang, Wu, 2017]. Originally, clickbait is based on
some creative headlines and is aimed at attracting
public attention to the topical issue using both content
and form (comp.: [Molyneux, Coddington, 2019]).
As a rule, study materials include texts
posted in social networks [Agrawal, 2016; Anand,
Chakraborty, Park, 2017; Khater et al., 2018;
Potthast et al., 2016; Serrano, Romero-Rodríguez,
Gómez, 2018; Wang, Wu, 2017; Zheng et al.,
2017], far less they involve news websites [Geckil
et al., 2018; Molyneux, Coddington, 2019].
Attempts have been made to classify clickbaits
based on symbols [Ageeva, Smyshliaeva, 2019;
Gavrikova, 2018a; Wongsap et al., 2018], wordings
or content [Zheng et al., 2018]. A number of
research are attempted to create a topic model
[Al Asaad, Erascu, 2018; Potthast et al., 2016;
Serrano, Romero-Rodríguez, Gómez, 2018],
a 
b 
c 
Fig. 1. A promise of laugh moments:
a – funny video showing an animal drama has won the hearts of Internet surfers;
b – beach activities with no retouch and photoshop applied: you’ll be crying with laughter;
c – jokey photos making everybody laugh (20 photos)
154
МАТЕРИАЛЫ И СООБЩЕНИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
neurolinguistic model [Agrawal, 2016; Anand,
Chakraborty, Park, 2017; Fu et al., 2017], user
behaviour model [Zheng et al., 2017], lexical
model [Zheng et al., 2018], etc. This article
suggests that we put clickbait in the context of
dialogics to see the role of comic tools in hypertext
formation [Bakhtin, 1996; Duskaeva, 2004].
Study methodology
In search of clickbait definition, the following
characteristics have been defined, namely,
headline function within the text and advertising
function as a part of communication. The latter is
realised through attracting attention due to the
shocking character of the form and it is often not
linked with the content of the headlined text
[Ageeva, Smyshliaeva, 2019; Khater et al., 2018;
Nikolaeva, 2017; Solov’ev, 2018; Vol’skaia, 2018].
We would like to direct attention to the
dialogical essence of such a headline, taking into
account a position taken by the headlines in the
structure of hypertext formation. Proceeding from
the three-part structure of media talk, developed
by L.R. Duskaeva, consisting of paratext,
metatext and intratext [Duskaeva (ed.), 2018], we
ascribe clickbait to the phenomenon of paratext
within hypertext, thus providing the latter with
intertextual interconnection formed within the
interaction with presupposed reader’s reaction to
a clickbait. Any promise, like “touting” during a
fair or a buffoonery, urges users to communicate
cheerfully and plainly in order to receive some
kind of pleasure.
This article is aimed at analysing the
represented clickbait content that promises convivial
communication and specifying direct and indirect
speech act means. This task is fulfilled by means
of a) delivering a semantic and pragmatic
classification of clickbaits; b) specifying, analysing
and classifying the means of defining major
components of clickbait intention by using verbal
and non-verbal means within different media types.
The study materials cover promissive
clickbaits implying some comic content posted in
Russian-language networks. This choice is not an
accidental one. Despite the fact that since 2016
[Ageeva, Smyshliaeva, 2019] the campaign to get
rid of clickbaits has been run, this phenomenon is
spread so wide that clickbaits can be found even
in news media discourse, which is supposed to be
forbidden, as the major value of news reporting is
providing information. Nevertheless, to win the
reader’s attention, headlines appear to become
more entertaining. We have collected 50 clickbaiting
headlines at the news portal Lenta.ru in order to
study the stated topic. To collect empirical
database for the research, we have used a
continuous sampling method. Lenta.ru is one of
the largest Russian news portals covering events
in the area of economy, politics, defence and law
enforcement agencies, science and technology,
culture, sports, etc. The portal covers both Russian
and international news. In the latter case, we are
talking about translated texts taken from different
foreign sources referred to by the authors.
Curiously enough, most often those clickbaits that
have the semantics of comicality are provided by
translated texts of some entertaining character.
The studies performed resort to the means
of modelling, for deductive pragmalinguistic
interpretation of clickbaiting headlines.
The deductive pragmalinguistic interpretation
of clickbaiting headlines resulted in distinguishing
several stages of constructing comic clickbaits:
1) inspiring remark of a clickbait actor implying a
promise; 2) verbal and non-verbal markers of
laughter; 3) markers of a presupposed funny reply
to the stimulus. These are the most distinguishing
symbols of a clickbaiting promise. Thus, the
speech act implying a promise (clickbait) gets a
new form in the context of mass media.
Thus, the clickbait promise of laugh is based
on establishing a connection of any nature with the
text announced in a clickbait. The degree of the
explication of possible comic effect can be different
as well as the degree of its connection with the
text content and the means representing comicality.
Proceeding from the links between the components
of the comic clickbait model, several types of
language-verbalized clickbaits can be specified:
1) narrative headlines proposing the reader to laugh
at the things that were laughed at by other readers
before; 2) offering headlines providing for the
promise of comic content using laughter markers;
3) allusive clickbaits providing for a hint to continue
an entertaining reading; 4) nominating clickbaits
providing for expected reaction of laughter
expressed because some objects are presented.
In accordance with the stated topic, the
analysis pays special attention to the semantics
of clickbaits and their lexical content, therefore
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
155
N.A. Prokofeva, I.A. Akulovich. The Language Means of Comicality in Clickbait Headings
the proposed analysis also includes certain
elements of content analysis and lexical analysis.
From the standpoint of the authors of the article,
this allows one to achieve the most complete,
comprehensive understanding of the phenomenon
under consideration.
In addition, when describing the “heading – text”
effects, as well as when explaining communicative
objectives and tasks, one cannot do without a
methodology developed in terms of intentional
stylistics. This is the final stage of the analysis,
which makes it possible to fully represent the
phenomenon of clickbaiting in the broad outlines
of the development trends characteristic of the
modern media text.
Results and discussion
The results of contextual and pragmastylistic
analysis are presented below together with the
explication of every type. It will help prove the
hypotheses about pragmatic relationship between
the title and the text, demonstrate its proximity to
fair touting, reveal the techniques of creating
clickbait headings in media discourse.
The first type is composed of narrative
clickbaits that contain a reminder of some comic
situation or a story. It is suggested that its details are
to be revealed in the course of further reading only:
(1) Несуразный смокинг Трампа на встрече с
королевой подняли на смех (Lenta.ru. URL: https://
lenta.ru/news/2019/06/10/trumpstuxedo/) –
“Trump’s absurd tuxedo was laughed at during
the meeting with the queen” (hereinafter translated by
us. – N. P., I. A.);
(2) Мать жениха подняли на смех за попытку
перещеголять невесту (Lenta.ru. URL: https://lenta.ru/
news/2019/08/02/sameasbride/) –
“Bridegroom’s mother was laughed at for
attempting to outmatch the bride”.
As we see it, such a clickbait contains
indications of a speech act implying laughter
(phraseological unit осмеян (laughed somebody
out)); there is an object triggering laughter by
means of it being not appropriate in a given
situation (absurd tuxedo, attempt to outmatch
the bride). Finally, such a clickbait provides for a
subject of laughter; it is indicated by indefinite-
personal forms, as a rule (laughed somebody
out, somebody was ridiculed).
(3) Любимый дешевый бренд россиян выпус-
тил женскую одежду для мужчин и был осмеян
(Lenta.ru. URL: https://lenta.ru/news/2019/06/04/
menstop/) –
“Cheap brand admired by Russians started a
female clothes line for men and was laughed out”.
In the post titled the headline attracts
attention due to the abundance of assessment
lexical units. Absolute contact-establishing
potential is conveyed by a positively assessing
word admired by; and there appears some kind
of discordance in the word combination cheap
and admired by – so, emotional assessment
together with pragmatic assessment provides for
such a contact-establishing potential. Visual
component, being means of attracting attention,
apart from a headline, is a photo of a dark-
skinned man with a shirtless torso. This way, an
object to laugh at was introduced by Asos brand
having released female clothes for men, and it
triggered both laughter and indignation of their
supporters (users). The text has several
comments of Twitter network users, having left
their critical opinion on brand’s newcomers. They
are in no way linked to the semantics of
comicality, though the headline uses the potential
of comic tools, namely, the combination of a verb
in the past tense and a short form of past
participle осмеян (was laughed out).
This type of headlines include the following ones:
(4) Невесту высмеяли за слишком маленькое
помолвочное кольцо (Lenta.ru. URL: https://lenta.ru/
news/2019/05/14/smallring/) –
“Bride was teased because of a too small
engagement ring”;
similar structure is characteristic for the following
headlines:
(5) Тучную невесту высмеяли за похожее на
пижаму платье (Lenta.ru. URL: https://lenta.ru/news/
2019/06/04/dressshaming/) –
“Plus-size bride was ridiculed at the wedding
for wearing a pyjamas-like dress”;
(6) Невесту высмеяли за неподобающее ниж-
нее белье и шляпу на свадьбе (Lenta.ru. URL: https:/
/lenta.ru/news/2019/07/23/brideshaming/) –
“The bride was laughed out because of
inappropriate underwear and a hat at the wedding”;
(7) Странные пятна на платье невесты рассме-
шили пользователей сети (Lenta.ru. URL: https://
lenta.ru/news/2019/08/01/coffeebreak/) –
156
МАТЕРИАЛЫ И СООБЩЕНИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
“Strange spots on bride’s clothes made Internet
users laugh”,
where the actor of a speech act in an indefinite-
personal sentence involves the addressee to join some
combined action using such verbs as высмеяли
(ridiculed, laughed out), namely, to laugh at a non-
ordinary situation with addressee’s attention being
focused on the absurdity of bride’s clothes:
underwear, hat and strange blots on the dress.
Headline (4) has a bride as a speech object and
an engagement ring as its subject in order to
involve the addressees in the situation for them to
laugh at. It uses the picture of the ring for the
web users to laugh at its size, suggesting that
scientists devise an instrument to examine the size
of the ring. Thus, linguistic means used in the
headline are predetermined by the adverb of
measure too much, pointing at the deviation from
the norm meaning “way over, beyond measure”,
and а qualitative adjective “small” characterizing
a substantial deviation from average size values.
An indirect indication of a subject to be laughed
at is provided by using the verb высмеяли
(laughed out).
Such type of headlines is often eliminating the
line between the intimate (private) and the public.
(8) Студентку подняли на смех за отказ брить
ноги из-за лени (Lenta.ru. URL: https://lenta.ru/news/
2019/04/03/depressed/) –
“Female student was made fun of because she
refused to shave her legs claiming that she is lazy”.
The headline cites the student from Valencia
saying that she was “just too lazy” to shave legs,
though her protesting position was to a great
extent connected with her refusal to follow the
rules being observed by the public. The text starts
from the photo displaying an unshaved leg, and
there is no object of a speech act in the picture.
The phraseological unit подняли на смех (made
fun of) together with a word combination because
of being lazy triggers more negative reactions
and implies disapproval of the public. The
phraseological unit by itself relates to the
conversational (informal) style. This fact is used
as a means of contact establishing, getting closer
to the author and the addressee. Thus, the heading
attracts attention as it triggers misunderstanding
and the barbed wit of the public: “A lot of people
were labelling her awful and disgusting, the others
were claiming that she had low self-esteem and
she was suffering from depression”.
Thus, the first type is composed of narrative
headlines describing the situation that implied
laughter and promised a reader to laugh at some
person, as the others have done it already. Such
clickbait model is the following: it contains the
marker of a laughter speech act, the object being
laughed at – some phenomenon that breaks rules
and norms. This type of headlines provides for
the names of the sources of the comicality, though
they are not further disclosed. Using the names
of laughter speech acts in indefinite-personal
meaning ensures the impression that the stated
source of the comic is being laughed at by
everybody. Due to the joint social action, the
reader is supposed to join a message to continue
communication. Thus, the headline contains the
narrative of a funny situation; the contact-
establishing intention is being realized. Often, the
attention is attracted by promising to laugh at
something extraordinary, some clumsy and strange
things.
The second type is made up of so-called
“offering” headlines containing no information
on the source of comicality, though promising
some entertainment to the reader. Often, the
object of derision is implied in political opponents
of Russia, e.g.:
(9) Спикера Рады развеселила инаугурация
Зеленского (Lenta.ru. URL: https://lenta.ru/news/2019/
05/20/parubii/) –
“Rada speaker was livened up by the
inauguration of Zelensky”,
where the referral to the name of a politician,
attended with a commentary demonstrating a
laughter reaction, is used as some kind of a “hook”.
The text referred to by the clickbait is about the
dissolution of Verkhovnaya Rada by the president
of Ukraine. This moment is a dramatic one in the
history of the country and it usually provokes no
laughter. Meanwhile, the text mentions the
reaction to the dissolution act by Andriy Parubiy,
when he characterized the inauguration of a new
president Vladimir Zelensky as a funny one, as
well as reaction to this statement expressed of
the deputies of Verkhovnaya Rada meeting it with
a burst of laughter. Contact-establishing effect of
a clickbait is increased due to introducing an
informal word развеселила (was livened up) to
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
157
N.A. Prokofeva, I.A. Akulovich. The Language Means of Comicality in Clickbait Headings
the context of usual terminology. The collision of
lexical units stylistics appears as it introduces some
ironic implication to the headline. Readers are
suggested that they find out its reasons. Though
the text states that the president of Ukraine
announced disbanding of Verkhovnaya Rada and
gave the deputies two months to meet his
requirements, and Andriy Parubiy, a speaker of
Verkhovnaya Rada, is just slightly mentioned as
well as him saying that the inauguration of a new
president Vladimir Zelensky is a funny one, and
the deputies met these words with a burst of
laughter. An allusion is used (namely a hint, that
Zelensky is a former comic actor and the deputies
consider his presidential activities as a continuation
of his former activities). Thus, Russian mass
media continues to take advantage of the topic of
the “might-have-been state control establishment”
in Ukraine. The ambivalence in the attitude to the
president of Ukraine, with everybody expecting
a burst of laughter at him, is used as a “hook” to
attract the reader’s attention in Russia. Turned
up expectations are formed due to the fact that
there is no mentioning of the reasons provoking
the laughter of the deputies of Verkhovnaya Rada.
One more heavily ridiculed object in today’s
Russian mass media is the prime minister of Great
Britain Theresa May:
(10) Премьер Британии поблагодарила Бори-
са Джонсона и рассмешила парламент (Lenta.ru.
URL: https://lenta.ru/news/2018/07/10/theresa/) –
“Prime minister of Great Britain thanked Boris
Johnson and made the Parliament laugh”.
The text states that Theresa May thanked the
Minister of International affairs Boris Johnson
barely containing the laughter at “the passion he
had while advancing country’s interests”, and
this way she triggered laughter of all the
attendees. Boris Johnson left the post of the Head
of the Foreign office as he was opposing the
measures taken by Theresa May, who was
demanding a stricter scenario of the country’s
exit from the supranational union. The headline
misleads the readers, as some logical links
connecting the predicates are left not clear:
whether the laughter of the Parliament was
caused by the gratefulness of the Prime minister
or the Prime minister has become the reason
for the laughter herself or the fact that her
gratefulness was addressed to Boris Johnson.
In order to find it out, readers have to go through
the text following the clickbait.
The promise of laughter is contained in the
following example as well:
(11) Представление российского игрока в НХЛ
рассмешило пользователей сети (Lenta.ru. URL:
https://lenta.ru/news/2019/07/30/lol_goose/) –
“The introduction Russian hockey player to the
NHL team made Internet surfers laugh”.
In this case, the headline can be named bivalent:
the names of a derision object (the introduction
of a Russian hockey player) and laughter
subject (Internet users) are given to indicate the
laughter reaction. The very situation does not give
any explanation. Thus, the author of the headline
ensures the effect of turned up expectations by
using a word referring to the semantic field named
“comicality”. Hint to the possible laughter reaction
becomes a so-called “hook”, and this way it incites
a desire to read the following text.
Hint to the comic nature of the situation is
present in the article headlined:
(12) Незадачливый ухажер выдал набор фак-
тов о себе и рассмешил пользователей сети (Lenta.ru.
URL: https://lenta.ru/news/2019/04/30/mujchina/) –
“Down-on-his-luck boyfriend has revealed some
facts about himself and made Internet users laugh”.
Here, we again face a not fully informative
headline containing a lot of hints with no
explanation to the questions appearing while
reading the article. Characteristic of the laughter
object attracts attention due to a casual word
boyfriend. Here it is used ironically in combination
with an adjective незадачливый (down-on-his-
luck), defining a naive person. Lexical unit “вы-
дал (revealed, disclosed)” suggests comic nature
of the action in this context as well. The semantics
of the comic element is increased with each word
contained in the headline. The very situation
provoking laughter is left unclear.
(13) Парней из Tinder подняли на смех (Lenta.ru.
URL: https://lenta.ru/news/2019/04/25/typical_tinder/) –
“Guys from Tinder were ridiculed”.
The text headlined tells the story of Jon Foor from
Los Angeles, scriptwriter working for UCB
Theatre. Together with friends, he made a mock
video to show an “average guy from Tinder”. The
headline uses a casual phraseological unit “to
158
МАТЕРИАЛЫ И СООБЩЕНИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
ridicule” to make somebody an object to be
laughed at. As all the forms are similar, the author
of the video got the feeling that he is looking
through the pages of the same person. Comic
effect is created due to the literalization of the set
phrase поднять на смех (literally “to raise on
laugh”) which is usually understood as “to laugh
somebody out”, “to ridicule”, though in the context
(after reading the text) it is perceived in the
meaning of “writing a comic play scene that will
make somebody laugh”.
(14) Пациент с опухолью мозга принялся шу-
тить прямо во время операции (Lenta.ru. URL:
https://lenta.ru/news/2019/04/07/joker/) –
“Medical patient suffering from a tumour started
to joke right during the surgery”.
The article headlined tells that after the patient
comes round from anaesthetic he asks whether
the surgeons have taken his brain outside. This
phrase gives no reason to laugh. Though the
headline intrigues readers by means of disturbing
situation’s picture. Within the situation, the patient
stays unconscious, and the possibility to laugh in
this case is more likely a mystification. Moreover,
the magnetism of the given headline is related to
the referral to a taboo subject: health, surgeries,
etc. Most commonly, these topics are not laughed
at and pose no reason to laugh. The attractive
nature of the headline is ensured by means of
interfering with private life.
While speaking about taboo topics, we cannot
but mention that such clickbaits, which authors refer
to as “below-the-belt” topics, are often used.
Inclusion of this topic into a “comic” headline is
expected to strengthen “a standpoint of a headline”.
(15) Телеведущие расшутились о пенисе во
время эфира (Lenta.ru. URL: https://lenta.ru/news/
2019/04/22/lil_or_big_dicky/) –
“TV presenters couldn’t stop joking about penis
during the broadcast”.
This headline constitutes a sentence with a
message on the subject of a speech act with no
clarification of the nature of the discussion. In
other words, here we see another bivalent
headline with a hint to the situation of laughter
indicating subject and object of laughter. Such
delivery form of intrigues provides the effect of
turned-up expectations. Everything linked with
obscenity is always interesting and triggers
curiosity. This is what the author of a given
headline counts on. The text is accompanied by
the video taken from the British morning television
show called Good Morning Britain, where the
broadcaster Kate Garraway made a joke on the
size of the “cock” of his colleague Richard
Madeley. As is often the case, such headlines are
associated with language games: laughter reaction
put in the headline was realized while discussing
creative activities of a rapper with an expressive
pseudonym Lil Dicky, which can have “small
penis” as one of the possible translation options.
(16) Смеявшиеся над докладом о зарплатах
врачи раскрыли свой реальный заработок (Lenta.ru.
URL: https://lenta.ru/news/2019/03/28/bashkir/) –
“Doctors who were laughing at the report on
doctors’ salaries revealed the information on how much
they earn”.
The article headlined tells about the salary
amounts received by the medical staff of a
maternity hospital in Bashkiria. Topics that are
linked to money and salary issues always provoke
public interest. Moreover, curiosity is fuelled by
the semantics of a secret introduced by means of
the lexical unit раскрыли (revealed). Here, there
is only one indication of the laughter subject with
no further information on the situation caused
laughter. The desire to read the text is provoked
by turned up the expectation to learn the secret
linked to the salaries issue as well as the cause of
laughter.
Allusive headlines
The difference of such clickbaits is in the
nomination of a laughter act with no reason
provoking it. Meaning of such headlines is not only
to provoke laughter or invite to laugh together but
also to provide a hint that text contains some
message being of interest for the readers. As for
allusive headlines, first of all, we focus on those using
comic lexical units to increase the reader’s interest
rather than to reveal the content of the text.
(17) He is Зе! Президент (YouTube. URL: https://
www.youtube.com/channel/UCp2zBKrqP0Z
QF6RN4RJtF2Q) –
“Зе (in Russian)! President”.
Generic name for the type of texts
discussing political activities of Zelensky. In other
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
159
N.A. Prokofeva, I.A. Akulovich. The Language Means of Comicality in Clickbait Headings
words, the political figure turns into a private one
belonging to the circle of the closest acquaintances,
who can be given a funny nickname [Vasileva,
Prokofeva, 2015] and whose private life can be
discussed in some leisure moments. We would
pay attention to graceful language games implied
in the headline: Зе – these are the first two letters
of the last name of the president of Ukraine as
well as imitation of a vulgar pronunciation of the
definite article in the English language. The
headline’s ambiguity is conveyed in the following:
the fact whether the author laughs at the main
character or admires his activities becomes the
most intriguing part of the text as well as the
means to form the effect of turned-up
expectations from the text or a type of texts
following.
Another example of allusive headlines can
be seen in the following clickbait:
(18) Насмешливые школьники заставили жен-
щину похудеть на 63 килограмма (Lenta.ru. URL:
https://lenta.ru/news/2019/06/10/zatravili/) –
“Sarcastic students made a woman lose 63 kilos”;
the attention is attracted by the promise to explain
how to lose 63 kilos. The semantics of comicality
is conveyed in the comic subject (students). The
very situation stated in the headline cannot be
accepted as a funny one. The headline rather
promises information on a person whose deed is
worthy of respect or admiration. Comic object
(promising the reader some interesting information
to read) is a woman from the British city of
Warrington, who lost weight for the sake of her
daughter who was laughed at by the classmates.
In this regard, we can state that semantics of
comicality here is a contact-establishing means
only. Further on, it is counted on supporting the
contact by maintaining the interest in the actions
of the main character of the article.
Another example goes about shocking the
public due to the violation of behaviour
stereotypes:
(19) Ребенок громко высмеял пренебрегаю-
щую гигиеной пассажирку самолета (Lenta.ru. URL:
https://lenta.ru/news/2019/06/07/barefooooot/) –
“A child laughed out loud at an airline passenger
neglecting hygiene rules”.
We can hardly expect that a child can laugh
intentionally to make a monkey out of an adult.
Contact is established due to announcing
something impossible: subject situation a child
высмеял (laughed out loud) does not correlate
with the expected behaviour of children. The
interest of the public is provoked by the following
dissonance: neglecting hygiene. While watching
the video going before the text, we see an
intentional misleading of the reader: the parent is
the one who laughs, not the child. Promising
communication by referring to two factors violating
the image of the typical behaviour of adults and
children proves effective for clickbaiting: the
headline under analysis was viewed a record
number of times.
(20) Дикие пранки, задницы и никаких правил
(Lenta.ru. URL: https://lenta.ru/articles/2019/06/13/
zdorovetsky/) –
“Wild prank calls, ass holes and lack of any rules)”.
Allusive mechanism of clickbaiting is seen
in the heading (20) where attention is attracted
not by a lexical unit пранки (prank calls), but a
colloquial rude word ass hole which indicates a
subject of the comic situation. Text is
accompanied by the video showing a half-naked
American top-model Kinsey Wolanski entering the
football field during the match between British
“Tottenham” and “Liverpool”. Such a thought-
out campaign made up and prepared by a young
guy Vitaly Zdorovetsky is aimed at the majority
of views and increasing online popularity.
Barbarism prank adopted from the English
language is used in combination with the word
wild highlighting rudeness, uncontrollability,
clumsiness and strange nature of these jokes.
(21) Тренер сборной России по хоккею отре-
агировал на насмешки американских СМИ
(Lenta.ru. URL: https://lenta.ru/news/2019/05/24/
vorobiev) –
“Russian hockey team coach reacted to the
mockery in American mass media”.
The headline uses the word mockery as one
associated with the semantic field of comicality,
though the text does not tell us that the journalist
of an American newspaper laughs playing of the
Russian team out. Reason for writing the article
is in the comment of the head trainer of the
Russian hockey team Ilya Vorobyev to the critical
words of American journalist from The New York
Times July Robenhaimer, who labelled the tactics
160
МАТЕРИАЛЫ И СООБЩЕНИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
of the team as absurd in the interview to the TV
channel “Russia Today”. The cheating is in the
fact that the text has the comments of the journalist
writing for one magazine only, though after reading
the text we get the impression that all American
mass media sources laugh at the Russian hockey
team. Clickbait meaning, as it appears, does not
tell something extremely funny, but rather attracts
attention to some intrigue using the words
belonging to the semantic field of comicality. The
word насмешки (mockery) provokes interest in
the readers; contact-establishing potential is
referred to the promise to tell us about the trainer’s
reaction. Thus, the conflict that is interesting for
the readers is indicated. Such headlines are
intended for those readers who are interested in
the announced subjects and who will read the text
till the very end.
The promise containing a hint to the comic
character of the situation is contained in the headline:
(22) Телеведущий непристойно пошутил о
собаке и рассмешил ведущую (Lenta.ru. URL:
https://lenta.ru/news/2019/04/22/doggy_style) –
“TV presenter afforded a joke about a dog and
made a female TV presenter laugh”.
The text is accompanied by the video featuring a
host of the American channel NBC4 David Ushery
telling a story about a dog who had swam 217
kilometres and was saved by the worker of a drilling
installation unit, who said that the dog “definitely
gave a new meaning to the phrase ‘doggy style’”.
Ushery immediately corrected his words saying that
it was a slip of the tongue and he meant to say that
doggy style meant “doggy paddle”, thus making
program’s co-host laugh. People who are not in
the know will see nothing funny in the given phrase
of the American host, though in reality, it provides
for a dirty joke relating to some sexual transactions.
Most readers will not understand it if no translation
is provided. Though everything that is dirty
provokes interest, and пошутил (made a joke)
and рассмешил (made somebody laugh) are some
type of a “hook” for a reader. Russian readers get
an association with a film clip “My doggy style”.
Nominative headlines
Promising laughter markers while perceiving
online content can be referred to in a lot of texts
(pictures), rubrics, etc.:
(23) Странные люди в общественном транс-
порте или чудики среди нас: самые смешные фото
(YouTube. URL: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=PCss5xyYZlE) –
“Strange people in public transport or freaks
among us: the funniest photos”;
(24) Самые смешные видео про котов
(YouTube. URL: https://www.youtube.com/channel/
UCBe-obq2p6OVmJSO9Eua1gg) –
“Funniest cat videos”;
clarifying relations between semantically
heterogeneous objects (photos, videos, news
stories selections, etc.). Such headlines are mostly
focused on the word with the semantics of
comicality in the direct meaning of this word. They
invite readers to relax and get some positive
emotions (see Fig. 2).
We would like to pay attention to the
following promises of the comic element: to laugh
hysterically. Here we see an exaggerated
statement proved by a casual assessment
characteristic of the object provoking laughter:
“all-thumbs” photographers. It is a light-hearted
joke starting the succession of photo materials
having the same light-hearted nature.
The promise of entertainment can be
conveyed in clickbaits by means of using
corresponding verbal nominations of comic acts:
scandals, hardcore stuff, not for weak-nerved,
lol, laughed my ass off, prank, to force tears
for laughter, it is pretty messed up, to
scandalize, shock, secrets are revealed, etc.
Such clickbaits express the failure to meet
expectations as the most often used effect in
the interconnection of a headline and a text.
Promised (declared) things do not correspond
the reality (text content). Such examples are
often found among YouTube videos, and they get
in the area of interests of clickbaiting
researchers (see Fig. 3).
It seems to us that it is a kind of game
played with the reader. By clicking a clickbait
headline the reader is ready to get frustrated.
Thus, switching between clickbaits and looking
for some entertainment, as if the reader was
making the expectations come true: the
headline does not correspond to the text
content. This way Internet surfers increase
their self-esteem playing a guessing game,
namely, that headlines do not correspond to
the text content.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
161
N.A. Prokofeva, I.A. Akulovich. The Language Means of Comicality in Clickbait Headings
Fig. 2. An invitation to laugh:
Title: It makes you laugh hysterically! Panoramic photos of animals made by “all-thumbs” photographers
 
 
 
 
a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 
Fig. 3. An invitation to have fun:
a – 20 minutes of laughter moving to tears | Best kickers of March 2019;
b – kickers of June 2019 #470 lol moving to tears, messing up, kickers – tricks;
c – best kickers of 2019! #28 lol moving to tears, messing up, the kicker – tricks;
d – kickers of March 2019 #515 lol moving to tears, kickers – tricks
162
МАТЕРИАЛЫ И СООБЩЕНИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
Conclusion
Clickbait is a communication act implying a
promise to continue communication. The analysis
provides a classification of clickbaits according
to the techniques of attracting attention used in
them. Several types of headlines are highlighted
in the paper, namely narrative headings, offering
headings, allusive and nominative headings.
One of often used “hooks” is promising
funny and entertaining reading. In this regard,
language-enabling resources of comicality are
being resorted to, though a headline and a
corresponding text are far from correlating with
each other in terms of content. Such “hooks” are
aimed at attracting as much attention as possible
to “own” content.
The proposed research highlights the
mechanisms of creating a clickbait in the semantic
field of “funny” from the positions of the
addressee, the subject of laughter, the object and
the matter of laughter. This approach allows us
to create a most complete description of each of
the analysed clickbait headlines and sets a
precedent for the further development of the given
line of research.
What is noteworthy is the repetitiveness and
uniformity of analysed headings, which confirms
the possibility of developing a model for identifying
clickbaits in each of the designated semantic fields.
Moreover, from our point of view, it is the lexical
model that is especially promising, since keywords
allow us to detect clickbait most easily and quickly.
The properties of the structure of clickbait
promising message:
– the subject of a speech act aimed at
involving readers in the situation implying laughter;
– the object of a comic reaction implying
laughter;
– user;
– attracting attention to some interesting
information.
Clickbaits are often accompanied by some
shocking value provoking the referral to the taboo
topics (“below-the-belt” topics), suggesting that
readers laugh at the things that usually provoke
no laughter (death, physical disadvantages, etc.).
Promise message attracts attention by
implementing an active usage of various language
expressive means such as phraseological units,
conversational vocabulary, precedent names,
verbal markers of comicality and expressive
lexical units.
As clickbait is easier and quicker by using
keywords, the most significant role is played by
the following lexical units: laughed out, are
laughing, was laughed at, has livened up,
made a joke, started joking, laughing, made
laughing, ridiculed, couldn’t stop joking,
smiled, had somebody in stitches, to mock,
refused joking around. We view clickbait as a
means of hypertext formation usually based on
the appeal to join those who have already enjoyed
reading the news. A significant place in a clickbait
phenomenon is occupied by the headlines implying
direct or indirect promises to make readers laugh.
Verbal and non-verbal means are used in the
process of clickbait formation to indicate the
reaction implying laughter. It constitutes a so-
called hook used to involve the user in the
communication act. Having learnt the details,
readers are not always eager to laugh, though the
actor of a communication act hopes to increase
“appeal’s” productivity.
NOTE
1 The study was carried out with the financial
support of the RSF: project no. 19-18-00530 “Humour
as a communicative resource in the digital news
environment”.
REFERENCES
Ageeva G.A., Smyshliaeva V.A., 2019. Clickbait:
etimologiia, semantika, sredstva vyrazheniia
[Clickbait: Etymology, Semantics, Expression
Means]. Molodezhnyi vestnik Irkutskogo
natsional’nogo issledovatel’skogo tekhniches-
kogo universiteta [Young Researchers’ Journal
of ISTU], vol. 9, iss. 1, pp. 153-158.
Agrawal A., 2016. Clickbait Detection Using Deep
Learning. 2nd IEEE International Conference on
Next Generation Computing Technologies
(NGCT), Dehradun, India. S. l., IEEE Publ.,
pp. 268-272.
Al Asaad B., Erascu M., 2018. A Tool for Fake News
Detection. 20th International Symposium on
Symbolic and Numeric Algorithms for
Scientific Computing (SYNASC), September
20–23, Timisoara, Romania. S. l., IEEE Publ.,
pp. 379-386. DOI: 10.1109/SYNASC.2018.
00064.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
163
N.A. Prokofeva, I.A. Akulovich. The Language Means of Comicality in Clickbait Headings
Anand A., Chakraborty T., Park N., 2017. We Used Neural
Networks to Detect Clickbaits: You Won’t Believe
What Happened Next! 39th European Conference
on Information Retrieval (ECIR), April 8–13,
Aberdeen, United Kingdom. S. l., Springer, pp. 541-
547. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-56608-5_46. (Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), no. 10193).
Bakhtin M.M., 1996. Problema rechevykh zhanrov [The
Problem of Speech Genres]. Sobranie sochinenii.
V 7 t. [Complete Works. In 7 Vols.]. Moscow,
Russkie slovari, vol. 5, pp. 159-206.
Brzozowska D., 2013. Demotivators as a New Type of
Media Texts. Medialingvistika [Media
Linguistics]. Saint Petersburg, Izd-vo Sankt-
Peterburgskogo 
gosudarstvennogo
universiteta, iss. 2, pp. 124-130.
Chanysheva Z.Z., 2016. Informatsionnye tekhnologii
smyslovykh iskazhenii v klikbeit-zagolovkakh
[Information Technologies of Semantic
Distortions in Clickbait Headlines]. Vestnik
Permskogo natsional’nogo issledovatel’skogo
politekhnicheskogo universiteta. Problemy
iazykoznaniia i pedagogiki [PNRPU Linguistics
and Pedagogy Bulletin], no. 4, pp. 54-62. DOI:
0.15593/2224-9389/2016.4.5.
Daoud D.M., El-Seoud M.S.A., 2019. An Effective
Approach for Clickbait Detection Based on
Supervised Machine Learning Technique.
International Journal of Online and Biomedical
Engineering (iJOE), vol. 15, iss. 3, pp. 21-32.
DOI:  10.3991/ijoe.v15i03.9843.
Duskaeva L.R., ed., 2018. Medialingvistika v
terminakh i poniatiiakh : slov.-sprav. [Media
Linguistics in Terms and Concepts. Reference
Dictionary]. Moscow, Flinta Publ. 442 p.
Duskaeva L.R., 2004. Dialogicheskaia priroda
gazetnykh rechevykh zhanrov [The Dialogical
Nature of Newspaper Speech Genres]. Perm, Izd-
vo Permskogo universiteta. 276 p.
Fu J., Liang L., Zhou X., Zheng J., 2017. A
Convolutional Neural Network for Clickbait
Detection. 4th International Conference on
Information Science and Control Engineering
(ICISCE), 14 November, Changsha, China. S. l.,
IEEE Publ., pp. 6-10. DOI: 10.1109/
ICISCE.2017.11.
Gajda S., Brzozowska D., ed., 2000. Świat humoru. Opole,
Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Opolskiego. 628 p.
Gavrikova O.A., 2018a. Kriterii vyiavleniia klikbeit-
zagolovkov [Identification Сriteria of Сlickbait
Рeadlines]. Iazykovye edinitsy v svete
sovremennykh nauchnykh paradigm: materialy
IV Vseros. nauch.-prakt. konf. s mezhdunar.
uchastiem (20 dek. 2018 g.) [Linguistic Units
in the Light of Modern Scientific Paradigms.
Proceedings of the 4th Scientific and Practical
Conference With International Participation,
20 December, 2018]. Ufa, Izd-vo Bashkirskogo
gosudarstvennogo universiteta, pp. 23-28.
Gavrikova O.A., 2018b. O fastsinativnom vospriiatii
klikbeit-form v interdiskursivnom prostranstve
[Fascinative Perception of Clickbait Forms in an
Interdiscursive Space]. Doklady Bashkirskogo
universiteta, vol. 3, iss. 1, pp. 94-99.
Gavrikova O.A., 2018c. Smyslovoe iskazhenie
informatsii v klikbeit-zagolovkakh v tekstakh
politicheskogo mediadiskursa [Semantic
Distortion of Information in Clickbait Headers
in the Texts of a Political Media Discourse].
Vestnik Bashkirskogo universiteta [Bulletin of
Bashkir University], vol. 23, iss. 1, pp. 173-178.
DOI: 10.33184/bulletin-bsu-2018.1.28.
Geckil A., Mungen A.A., Gundogan E., Kaya M., 2018.
A Clickbait Detection Method on News Sites.
10th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Advances in Social Networks Analysis and
Mining (ASONAM), Barcelona, Spain, 28–
31 August. S. l., IEEE Publ., pp. 932-937.
Khater S.R., Al-Sahlee O.H., Daoud D.M.,
El-Seoud M.S.A., 2018. Clickbait Detection.
7th International Conference on Software and
Information Engineering (ICSIE), British
University in Cairo, Egypt, 2–4 May. Cairo, IEEE
Publ., pp. 111-115. DOI: 10.1145/3220267.3220287.
Molyneux L., Coddington M., 2019. Aggregation,
Clickbait and Their Effect on Perceptions of
Journalistic Credibility and Quality. Journalism
Practice. Taylor & Francis, vol. 14, iss. 4, pp. 429-
446. DOI: 10.1080/17512786.2019.1628658.
Nikolaeva A.V, 2017. Klikbeit: k opredeleniiu poniatiia
[Clickbait: Defining the Concept]. Aktual’nye
problemy stilistiki [Actual Problems of
Stylistics], no. 3, pp. 146-151.
Potthast M., Köpsel S., Stein B., Hagen M., 2016.
Clickbait Detection. 38th European Conference
on Information Retrieval Research (ECIR),
Padua, Italy, 20–23 March. S. l., Springer,
pp. 810-817. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-30671-1_72.
(Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS),
no. 9626).
Serrano J.G., Romero-Rodríguez L.M., Gómez Á.H.,
2018. Análisis del Clickbaiting en Los Titulares
de la Prensa Española Contemporánea. Estudio
de Caso: Diario El País en Facebook. Estudios
Sobre el Mensaje Periodistico, vol. 25, iss. 1,
pp. 197-212. DOI: 10.5209/ESMP.63724.
Shu K., Wang S., Le T., Lee D., Liu H., 2018. Deep
Headline Generation for Clickbait Detection.
18th IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining (ICDM), Singapore, 17–20 November.
Singapore, IEEE Publ., pp. 467-476. DOI: 10.1109/
ICDM.2018.00062.
164
МАТЕРИАЛЫ И СООБЩЕНИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
Sladkevich Zh.R., 2019. Zagolovki-anonsy v setevykh
mediaservisakh: mezhdu informirovaniem i
klikbeitingom [Announcement Headlines in
Network Media Services: Awareness and
Clickbaiting]. Medialingvistika [Media
Linguistics], vol. 6, iss. 3, pp. 354-369.
Solov’ev A., 2018. Klikbeit-zagolovki v reklame:
ispol’zovat’ nel’zia ignorirovat’ [Clickbait
Headlines in Ads: Should Be Used and Cannot
Be Ignored]. Zhurnalіstyka-2018: stan, prablemy
і perspektyvy: materyialy 20-i mіzhnarodnai
navukova-praktychnai kanferentsyі (Mіnsk, 15-
16 lіst. 2018 g.) [Journalism-2018: Current
Situation, Issues and Prospective Directions:
Proceedings of the 20th International Scientific and
Practical Conference (Minsk, 15–16 November,
2018)],  Mіnsk, BDU, pp. 253-255.
Vasileva V.V., 2017. “Obeshchanie smeshnogo” kak
strategiia privlecheniia massovoi auditoria
[“Promising Some Comic Entertainment” as a
Strategy to Attract Mass Audience].
Strategicheskie kommunikatsii v biznese i
politike: tez. Mezhdunar. nauch. konf. (Sankt-
Peterburg, 22–23 noyab., 2017 g.) [Strategic
Communication in Business and Politics. Thesis
Statements of International Scientific Conference
(Saint Petersburg, November 22–23, 2017)]. URL:
http://jf.spbu.ru/conf-pr/7558/7562-gr2.html
(accessed 20 December 2019).
Vasileva V., Prokofeva N., 2015. Slang Toponyms and
Newsmakers’ Nicknames as a Communicative
Contact and Indicator of Comic Culture in the
Modern Russian Journalism. International
Review of Management and Marketing, no. 5,
pp. 1-10.
Vinogradov V.V., 1959. O yazyke khudozhestvennoy
literatury [About the Language of Fiction].
Moscow, Goslitizdat Publ. 656 p.
Vol’skaia N.N., 2018. Klikbeit kak sredstvo sozdaniia
lozhnoi informatsii v internet-kommunikatsii
[Clickbait as a Means of Producing False
Information in Internet Communication].
Mediaskop [Mediascope], no. 2. URL: http://
www.mediascope.ru/2450 (accessed 19 December
2019). DOI: 10.30547/mediascope.2.2018.12.
Wang S., Wu Q., 2017. An Empirical Study on the
Clickbait of Data Science Articles in the WeChat
Official Accounts. International Conference on
Frontier Computing (FC), Osaka, Japan, 12–
14 July. S. l., Springer, pp. 131-140. DOI: 10.1007/
978-981-10-7398-4_14. (Lecture Notes in
Electrical Engineering (LNEE), no. 464).
Wongsap N., Lou L., Jumun S., Prapphan T.,
Kongyoung S., Kaothanthong N., 2018. Thai
Clickbait Headline News Classification and its
Characteristic. 2018 International Conference
on Embedded Systems and Intelligent
Technology and International Conference on
Information and Communication Technology
for Embedded Systems, (ICESIT-ICICTES),
Khon Kaen, Thailand, 7–9 May. S. l., IEEE Publ.,
pp. 1-6. DOI: 10.1109/ICESIT-ICICTES.2018.
8442064.
Zannettou S., Chatzis S.P., Papadamou K.,
Sirivianos M., 2018. The Good, the Bad and the
Bait: Detecting and Characterizing Clickbait on
YouTube. 1st Deep Learning and Security
Workshop, co-located with the 39th IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy, San
Francisco, 21–23 May. S. l., IEEE Publ., pp. 63-
69. DOI: 10.1109/SPW.2018.00018.
Zheng H.-T., Yao X., Jiang Y., Xia S.-T., Xiao X., 2017.
Boost Clickbait Detection Based on User
Behavior Analysis. 1st Asia-Pacific Web and Web-
Age Information Management Joint Conference
on Web and Big Data, APWeb-WAIM, Beijing,
China, 7–9 July. S. l., Springer, pp. 73-80. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-63564-4_6. (Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (LNCS), no. 10367).
Zheng H.-T., Chen J.-Y., Yao X., Sangaiah A.K., Jiang
Y., Zhao C.-Z., 2018. Clickbait Convolutional
Neural Network. Symmetry. Multidisciplinary
Digital Publishing Institute (MDPI), vol. 10,
iss. 5. DOI: 10.3390/sym10050138.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
N.A. Prokofeva, I.A. Akulovich. The Language Means of Comicality in Clickbait Headings
Information About the Authors
Natalia A. Prokofeva, Candidate of Sciences (Philology), Associate Professor, Media
Linguistics Department, Higher School of Journalism and Mass Communications, Saint Petersburg
State University, Vasilyevskiy ostrov, 1-ya Liniya, 26, 199004 Saint Petersburg, Russia,
n.prokofieva@spbu.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3105-4530
Irina A. Akulovich, Assistant, Chair of the Public Relations Department, Saint Petersburg State
Electrotechnical University “LETI”, Professora Popova St, 5, 197376 Saint Petersburg, Russia;
Postgraduate Student, Media Linguistics Department, Higher School of Journalism and Mass
Communications, Saint Petersburg State University, Vasilyevskiy ostrov, 1-ya Liniya, 26, 199004 Saint
Petersburg, Russia, iaakulovich@etu.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4804-7014
Информация об авторах
Наталья Анатольевна Прокофьева, кандидат филологических наук, доцент кафедры
медиалингвистики Высшей школы журналистики и массовых коммуникаций, Санкт-Петербург-
ский государственный университет, Васильевский остров, 1-я линия, 26, 199004 г. Санкт-
Петербург, Россия, n.prokofieva@spbu.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3105-4530
Ирина Анатольевна Акулович, ассистент кафедры «Связи с общественностью», Санкт-
Петербургский государственный электротехнический университет «ЛЭТИ» им. В.И. Ульянова
(Ленина), ул. Профессора Попова, 5, 197376 г. Санкт-Петербург, Россия; аспирант кафедры медиа-
лингвистики Высшей школы журналистики и массовых коммуникаций, Санкт-Петербургский го-
сударственный университет, Васильевский остров, 1-я линия, 26, 199004 г. Санкт-Петербург, Рос-
сия, iaakulovich@etu.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4804-7014
