Druzhinin A.S., 2021
166
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
ДИСКУССИИ

www.volsu.ru
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.14
UDC 81’1:791
Submitted: 25.01.2020
LBC 81.006
Accepted: 16.02.2021
MOTION PICTURES AS A SOURCE OF EMPIRICAL LANGUAGE DATA
(A CASE STUDY OF COUNTERFACTUALS)
Andrey S. Druzhinin
MGIMO University, Moscow, Russia
Abstract. The article focuses on the problem of research methodology in linguistics and argues that motion
pictures, or feature films, provide a good source of empirical data for a realistic investigation of language as a
communicative behavior. Evidence from epistemology and philosophy of science shows that scriptism and rationalism
as two dominating methodologies in traditional linguistics do not give a whole picture of language functionality
because through them we cannot observe a human’s communicative behavior in dynamics. The aim of the article is
to offer an alternative understanding of the subject-matter, method and data for linguistic research which would be
grounded on human experience observable in films. In particular, the term ‘languaging’ is adopted to describe the
dynamic process of experience construction in referential and attentional framings. The investigation of languaging
is thus based on the principle of holism, circularity and ‘double perspectival’ view of one’s experience. The author
of the article gives a number of reasons why written texts alone do not provide reliable data in this respect and why
motion pictures are a more viable alternative. The paper introduces the methodology of holistic research and open-
ended experiential analysis and demonstrates in a case study how counterfactuals as grammatically and experientially
enacted patterns can be observed and investigated in the film Atonement.
Key words: experience construction, experiential context, motion pictures, languaging, enactivism, holism.
Citation. Druzhinin A.S. Motion Pictures as a Source of Empirical Language Data (A Case Study of
Counterfactuals). Vestnik Volgogradskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2. Yazykoznanie [Science Journal
of Volgograd State University. Linguistics], 2021, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 166-175. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.14
УДК 81’1:791
Дата поступления статьи: 25.01.2020
ББК 81.006
Дата принятия статьи: 16.02.2021
КИНОФИЛЬМ КАК ИСТОЧНИК ЭМПИРИЧЕСКИХ ДАННЫХ О ЯЗЫКЕ
(НА ПРИМЕРЕ КОНТРФАКТУАЛЬНЫХ ВЫСКАЗЫВАНИЙ)
Андрей Сергеевич Дружинин
Московский государственный институт международных отношений (университет) МИД России,
г. Москва, Россия
Аннотация. Статья затрагивает проблему методологии в науке о языке. Установлено, что художественные
фильмы предоставляют адекватные эмпирические данные, необходимые для реалистичного изучения языка
как коммуникативного поведения человека. Доводы эпистемологии и философии науки свидетельствуют о
том, что методология «скриптизма» и рационализма, до сих пор востребованных в лингвонаучной практике,
не способна раскрыть сущность языка, поскольку она не дает возможности наблюдать коммуникативное по-
ведение человека в динамике. Цель данной статьи – предложить альтернативное понимание предмета, метода
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
167
A.S. Druzhinin. Motion Pictures as a Source of Empirical Language Data
и эмпирического материала лингвистического исследования, в центре внимания которого будет опыт человека,
доступный для наблюдения посредством динамики видеоряда. Вводится и объясняется термин «языковое пове-
дение» (languaging), обозначающий процесс конструирования человеком своего опыта в динамике меняю-
щихся объектов внимания и референции. Утверждается, что изучение языкового поведения основывается на
принципах холизма, циркулярности и диалектического взгляда на опыт человека. Автор статьи приводит ряд
доводов, объясняющих, почему в такой исследовательской парадигме одни только тексты не могут выступать в
качестве надежного источника данных о языке и почему фильмы являются лучшей альтернативой. На примере
кинофильма «Искупление» демонстрируется, как фильм, изучаемый в ракурсе предлагаемого подхода, помо-
гает раскрыть экспериенциальную сущность определенного грамматического явления.
Ключевые слова: конструирование опыта, экспериенциальный контекст, игровые картины, поведение
в языке, энактивизм, холизм.
Цитирование. Дружинин А. С. Кинофильм как источник эмпирических данных о языке (на примере
контрфактуальных высказываний) // Вестник Волгоградского государственного университета. Серия 2, Язы-
кознание. – 2021. – Т. 20, № 3. – С. 166–175. – (На англ. яз.). – DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.14
Introduction
Why sciences are concerned with the
dynamics of experience. As Paul Valéry put it,
“science is the collection of recipes that work
always” [Valéry, 1957, p. 1253]. Any scientific
research sets out to explore things and processes.
By doing so, a scientist pursues the goal of
explaining how they function to make sure he / she
knows when, how and where they happen. It is
the knowledge of these conditions that provides a
truly scientific understanding and definition of what
things and processes are. It is what “our faith in
science rests upon” [Valéry, 1957, p. 1253].
We cannot refer to things and processes
independent of what we do. The Nobel Prize
winner Percy Bridgman in his The Logic of
Modern Physics (1927) made a case for the
operational origin of all fundamental concepts of
time, space, length, etc., and the respective terms
used by science. “The true meaning of a term is
to be found by observing what a man does with
it (emphasis added. – A. D.), not by what a man
says about it” [Bridgman, 1958, p. 7].
Later, Humberto Maturana [1988] in his
philosophy of cognition maintained that reality,
however objective it might seem, has biological
roots in ourselves – more precisely, in our doings.
What we call the phenomena of reality are but our
experiences. ‘What is this or that thing or how does
it happen?’ is not what we should ask ourselves in
an effort to unearth the truth of reality. Instead,
questions like ‘What do I do when I distinguish a
thing?’ are more scientifically effective [Maturana,
2012]. For example, to investigate and define a
concept in physics, psychology or chemistry one
must isolate an object of observation, propose a
hypothesis explaining how, where and when the
phenomenon is, and is to be, repeatedly observed,
and then put this hypothesis to ‘life test’ to check if
it fits the real experiential situation [Glasersfeld,
1995, p. 117]. This procedure requires a scientist
to observe the dynamics of (his / her) doings,
otherwise neither physics nor chemistry nor any
other science would be able to validly explain the
reality of our life, or rather, living.
Thus, it appears that any science is meant to
observe phenomena as experiences rather than
objects ‘out there’, and it proves valid as long as it
is experientially grounded, i.e. it can provide
explanation of how, when and where this or that
experience can recur without fail. In this respect,
linguistics should pursue the same objectives. The
present article will discuss why it does not happen
and why mainstream theory of language has a too
heavy legacy of Aristotle’s analytical logic to focus
on human experience lived in the dynamics of
communication. There will also be given a
methodological alternative of studying cinema as
language-in-motion which may help the language
science to move from the (mono-)logical, text-
oriented stance towards the eco-logical and
experiential one.
Why linguistics tends to study static
objects. Per Linell [2005] in his provocative critique
of linguistics gives 101 reasons why mainstream
linguistics chooses to approach language as literacy
and the art of alphabetic writing rather than as
human’s natural bodily behavior situationally
embedded in the social and cultural environment.
He explains how linguists have become biased in
their research towards written, static texts ever
168
ДИСКУССИИ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
since literacy began to play a big cultural and even
political role. States have needed standardized
national languages to stand out in the political arena,
societies have needed educated people with good
writing skills. Moreover, literacy has always served
as a social distinction between those who can speak
the proper and correct language and those who
speak the vulgar vernacular. Language issues thus
stand ‘proxy’ for wider social issues [Rickford,
1999, p. 272]. “Inscriptions, in the concrete sense
of static marks on paper, have been the dominant
technology of language. At the same time, it is in
the development of literacy, in the schooling needed
for learning to read and write, that theories of
language structure have become necessary” [Linell,
2005, p. 5].
According to Linell, the age-long tradition
of language studies is characterized by scriptism,
i.e. the influence of writing on the
conceptualization of speech. Speech is a dynamic
activity distributed in real time with both speaker
and listener being physically present in the
immediate context, while texts are offline,
displaced and deferred. In terms of the dialogical
property of interactivity, the written text is
“suspended dialogue” [Peters, 1999] lacking any
immediate situational context [Linell, 2005, p. 21].
Suffice it to say that writing and reading belong
to the so-called secondary socialization, while the
primary empirical interactions in the form of
speaking and hearing are overshadowed in texts.
Thus, the structure of speech, or talk-in-
interaction, is mainly studied from the perspective
of its regular counterparts in conventional writing.
Even those linguistic disciplines concerned with the
grammar or pragmatics of spoken language treat
utterances (a unit of speech) in comparison to
sentences (a unit of text) and analyze what is
analyzable textually (‘spoken texts’ or ‘spoken
grammar’). For example, utterances which do not
display full clause structures are interpreted as
‘elliptical’, i.e. incomplete, lacking explicit proposition
or even dysfunctional. In fact, any utterance in a
spoken interaction may be called ‘elliptical’ because
it is natural for participants in a dialogue to exploit
properties of each other’s utterances and thereby
dynamically co-construct meanings and attitudes
[Bakhtin, 1981]. Another case in point is gestures.
Gestures cannot be (fully) represented in writing,
that is why their role in language analysis is often
minimized. Indeed, gestures, bodily postures, facial
expressions, gaze behavior are perfectly integrated
with verbal conduct. Alongside with linguistic
features, gestures help people construct meanings
and attitudes and “exploit features of the built
environment” [Goodwin, 2000].
It follows that the main methodological gap
in scriptism as posited by Linell and his supporters
is the failure to depart from dualism. The desire
to look at isolated structures as if independently
existing objects is a hallmark of the Cartesian
philosophy which dualizes our understanding of
the world in terms of subject-object relationships.
This tradition has persisted in linguistics ever since
literacy made it possible to observe inscriptions,
marks and other textually demarcated symbols
on paper. With writing, language becomes a static,
‘photographic’ (or rather, representational) object
existing ‘out there’. “Linguists are not dealing with
complex bodily conduct, behaviors, which exhibit
recurrent structural properties. <...> Instead, they
hypostatize, arrest, paralyze language structures
as a body of knowledge, posit them as abstractions
existing in and of themselves” [Linell, 2005, p. 9].
Another epistemological trap of scriptism is
rationalism. Written texts are by definition logically
organized intellectual products because writing is
a purely linear affair. Studying texts linguists tend
to find explanation not for what, how and why
the author organized in his / her writing (it is
physically impossible, as the context of writing is
never observable), but for how the author’s writing
can be described and thus logically organized once
again. In such a way, mainstream linguistic theory
aims to establish double logical coherences which
are detached from the reality of our perceptual
acting in the immediate context.
The overview of scriptism in linguistics
allows us to arrive at one important conclusion:
language studies are basically associated with
textology; generalizations made by linguists as a
result of their observations of speech are grounded
mainly upon what is or is not common to see on
paper, not in life. Indeed, language goes far
beyond writing. If it were not the case, illiterate
people would either be proclaimed a miracle or
considered non-linguistic at all.
From texts to experiences. In his studies
of children’s cognitive development, Leo Vygotsky
became the first Soviet scientist who proved that
language should not be approached analytically,
because language is synthesis by definition.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
169
A.S. Druzhinin. Motion Pictures as a Source of Empirical Language Data
Language, he maintained, is not what we write,
nor what speak, but is what we do towards, in
and through writing, speaking or any other social
and cultural interaction. According to Vygotsky, “to
understand another’s speech, it is not sufficient to
understand his words – we must understand his
thought. But even that is not enough – we must
also know its motivation” [Vygotsky, 1962, p. 151].
He claims that traditional methods of verbal
definition, by which he evidently meant describing
things, are totally “inadequate for studying
concepts... as they overlook the dynamics and the
development of the process of concept formation”
[Vygotsky, 1962, p. 96]. To find a term or definition
for a concept is to deal with ready-made knowledge
as the resulting product rather than the process of
thinking or knowing. This method also confines
research material to isolated verbalizations as the
only source of empirics.
There are two important implications of this
finding. First, language with all its structures,
components or units cannot be investigated from
within these units – it requires a much more holistic
effort. Namely, we must look at the generative
source of language, the process that takes place in
a domain other than the domain of definitions or terms
(cf.: [Maturana, Verden-Zöller, 2008, p. 154]).
Second, we must integrate our abstractions back
into the dynamics of bodily experience to check how
they fit the conditions of our living.
Experiential view of language underlies the
philosophy of enactivism in which language is
equated with the operational dynamics of
experience construction, or enactment of the
world [Piaget, 1937; Varela, Thompson, Rosh,
1993; Glasersfeld, 1995]. There can be given three
reasons to prove this point. First, “experience –
that which we distinguish as happening to us and
in us – cannot be denied” [Maturana, Verden-
Zöller, 2008, p. 13]. Second, language is the root
of all experience, i.e. all things happening to us
and in us, since “the language I speak is my
language, it makes me aware of myself” [Foerster,
2003, p. 297], it makes me an experiencer. Third,
experience or language is not something ready-
made or passively received. It is actively
constructed and organized in the course of
cognitive development. Otherwise, we humans
would not need to learn or live anything, instead
we would be a machine waiting to be adjusted
for the reception of the right signal.
What would be more appropriately termed
as languaging is thus a cycle of changes
happening to/in our body to reciprocally maintain
the continuity of our focused and unfocused
attention on “a sort of universe we shall appear to
ourselves to inhabit” [James, 1890, p. 401]. The fact
that our attention can be unfocused on some
sensorial data and be still ‘experientially active’ is
crucial for us humans: our attention once focusing
on a perceptual item can refocus on it later by some
power of volition and through recognition matrices
[Ceccato, Zonta, 1980; Glasersfeld, Ackermann,
2011] which all, in turn, are made possible in and
through languaging only [Kravchenko, 2016]. In this
way we construct our experience out of the
attentionally organized sensorial data, or else, our
experiences. They are what we can easily isolate
(abstract) from the sensorial flow, displace, or turn
upon themselves (reflect upon them), and live again
(enact) in a new context of interactions. Thus,
languaging as experience construction can be
characterized by the following ecology of enaction:
framing (isolating certain items from the
bodily dynamics) + reference (interacting with
these isolations: reflecting upon them and acting
upon these reflections) + attention (selection of
frames and their reference through changing
interests and desires, or relations).
Thus, to study reference frames, what we
commonly understand as names as well as their
constellations – texts, means to study
experiences, i.e. probe into our bodily operations
(sensorimotor functioning and thinking processes)
and their attentional triggers (relations).
Method of investigation
of experiential dynamics
in linguistic research
The dynamics of languaging as attentional
and referential framing makes our living cognitively
‘eco-logical’. It means that we operate in such
an ecology where our interests and desires, our
attentional processes determine our bodily actions
and operations (thinking, moving, sensing), and vice
versa. It means that every doing of ours changes
a relation in which our next doing occurs; every
decision we make, every word we say is related
to our previous experience and can be adequately
understood only in relation to this experience. If,
for instance, you move your hand from a basin of
170
ДИСКУССИИ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
cold water into one that is tepid, the second feels
hot; if you begin with hot water, the tepid feels
cold; the true temperature of the water, therefore,
cannot be determined because our judgment
depends on the experiential context.
It follows that the object of linguistic study
should be a frame of reference as an item of
experience enacted in the operational bodily
dynamics under certain contextual conditions. To
investigate such an object, we must rely upon two
methodological techniques by which we (1)
analyze a frame in one domain of observable
doings, as an action performed by the agent in
relation to something or someone (what exists out
there), and (2) synthesize all the accessible
epistemological, psychological, and even
physiological data to look at this frame in another
domain, as an interaction between the agent and
his / her relations (his / her experiential reality as
what he / she distinguishes as existing out there).
Thus, a hypothesis about a frame of
reference as a linguistic abstraction must be based
on the explanation of what, how, when and where
we do ‘to make this reference happen’. It implies
looking at the practical context of interactions in
which this frame of reference is enacted to
construct experience.
One way to do this is to study children at
different times of their cognitive development.
A problem may arise because interrelated
complexes in languaging do not take shape by
default but are actively constructed and tested
through trial and error over a course of time when,
later, they become a more or less stable and
sustainable structure or pattern of action.
Another path to approach direct experience in
its perceptual, empirical sense is to explain the
circumstances under which it is enacted as an
abstraction, or else, re-enacted as an already viable
and stable conceptual structure, internalized pattern
of action. In explaining the circumstances (when,
where, why?) we will also be able to identify the
mechanisms (how?) underlying this cognitive
enactment. Such mechanisms are epistemological
ways of concept construction in and through
abstractions, generalizations, and reflections (for a
detailed account see: [Piaget, 1937; Glasersfeld, 1995]).
For the sake of clarity, I have summarized
the procedural components of open-ended
experiential analysis after Varela et al. [1993] and
Glasersfeld [1995] and propose the following step-
by-step question-answer algorithm of scientific
observation and explanation of languaging-as-
experience-construction (see Table 1).
Table 1. Methodological algorithm of holistic research and open-ended experiential analysis of
language
(Step 1) Hypothesizing: What experience is enacted in/through a particular frame of reference? 
(Step 2) Observation and analysis: When / where is it enacted? 
What are the experiential circumstances driving one to refer to this experience? What new emerging 
experiences and emotional perturbations ‘here and now’ cause one to recreate the old experience in question? 
(Step 3) Observation and analysis:  Why is it enacted? 
What kind of desired result does one seek to achieve? What kind of experiential balance does one strive to 
restore? 
(Step 4) Observation and analysis:  How is it enacted? 
What operations does one do to experience something again? 
 Is it a direct experience that is acted out almost automatically, without much thinking? (= Do I enact an 
empirical abstraction from raw sensory material?) 
 Is it an indirect experience, i.e. one not only enacts an isolated item of (abstraction from) raw sensory 
material, but also reflects upon it to an extent that the experience is not re-created as it was? 
 How exactly does one reflect upon the abstracted sensory material? 
 Does one reflect upon the way one has this experience? (Does one change and develop an understanding of 
an experience to figure out how else one can have this experience? = Do I enact a reflective abstraction?) 
 Does one reflect upon the way one abstracts this experience? (Does one change or develop one’s 
understanding of understanding an experience = Do I enact a reflected abstraction?)  
(Step 5) Synthesis and verification of the hypothesis: Does the hypothesis work? Is the hypothesized experience 
enacted in the observed circumstances non-controversially? Can the deduced hypothesis predict the happening of 
the experience under the circumstances similar to those observed? How is the investigated experience distinguished 
from other phenomena? What is a better term for the investigated experience? 
 
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
171
A.S. Druzhinin. Motion Pictures as a Source of Empirical Language Data
Results and discussion
Motion pictures as enactive data
for linguistic research
Why a picture in motion is better than a
picture in isolation. To be able to grasp the
dynamics of languaging, we should find ways to
observe the experiential context of our semantic
interactions, or else, our semantic living
[Maturana, 2006]. The reason why it is not enough
to study and describe language in its semantic
abstractions is because isolated linear structures
will never ‘tell us the whole (holistic) story’: they
can only help de-fine, de-termine, find limitations
to what we set out to observe (cf. step 1 in our
methodological algorithm).
Motion pictures provide more or less reliable
data for investigating languaging processes
because in films we see what people do and
how they act, not just what they say. More than
that, we can observe the movement of people’s
(fictitious characters’) attention in their thinking
about what is displaced from the immediate
perceptual field. The latter becomes possible in
such a special form of filmed interactions that is
directed, i.e. when somebody (a film director)
takes responsibility for the viewers’ holistic
perception and understanding of what is happening
on the screen. In other words, in a feature film,
somebody’s living is projected as a complete,
meaningful story of which a viewer is expected
to make some whole sense. The experiential
context in such a story is always thorough enough
to rely upon because every doing of the character
is shown as preceding from, and proceeding to,
another doing of his / hers. All interactions of the
character stand in some generative relation to each
other, that is why the context of each interaction,
in our case – referential and attentional framing,
can be made easily explicit rather than speculated
upon. Thus, motion pictures provide data on ‘living
through talking’, acting upon language while other
semantic data offer us mainly talks about talking,
texts in and of themselves.
I will try to make it more explicit why motion
pictures go beyond familiar textual data and are
useful in any linguistic research which is aimed at
studying experience.
1. Uninterrupted non-linear dynamics: films
help follow non-linear cognito-perceptual changes
as they unfold in the human mind. There are no
visible textual demarcations hindering us from
experiencing the projected flow of living as it is.
Motion pictures are free from the bias of linear
written language where a reader is tempted into
becoming a researcher by looking at structures
and dialogical practices in isolation, as static
product-oriented objects on paper [Linell, 2005]
admitting of reading and rereading.
We should remember that repeating an
experience or interrupting the experiential flow is
another experience. The director will never replay
a series of shots for no particular reason, the
director will make this replay a part of the
continuous experiential flow as planned and
determined by the story. Under ordinary
circumstances, a viewer in the cinema cannot stop
the movie and go back to the previous shot or the
titles unlike a reader who sometimes has to refer
to the footnotes, appendices, etc. The author of a
book may choose to diverge from the narrative
by introducing philosophical reflections that have
little to do with the experiential dynamics of the
character. The director of a film is unable to show
anything but the flow of attention and experience
of the characters or / and narrator in the projection
of their living. In this way film watching can
guarantee natural conditions for non-linear
uninterrupted experiential dynamics.
2. Broader contextuality: it should be once
again stressed that in films we can observe
practical, empirical domains of every semantic
operation, while in texts we are confined to the
semantic domain of the same semantic operations.
Communication like any other interaction must be
observed and scientifically explained across the
domains of ‘action in’ and ‘action out’
(or generative mechanism and resulting process),
otherwise what we would be observing and
explaining is not an inter-action.
Even if we rely on data from corpora, what
we will be studying in the final analysis are written
texts, transcripts as linear affairs. Even if we find
instances of spoken communication, we will not
be able to make explicit the actual conditions in
which the interaction in point occurred. As objects
of study, texts are always bounded, while
experiential background to the object of our study
is never bounded; therefore, (experiential) context
is not wholly observable in texts. To hypothesize
about the experiential nature of this or that
172
ДИСКУССИИ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
semantic structure, we should go deeper into the
person’s emotioning, thinking, and sensorimotor
being in language. To make it possible, we must
make sure we get ahold of the person’s relevant
semantic living in totality. How can we make sure
what is relevant and what is not in written texts?
3. Distinctions between thinking and
perceiving at one time: as a rule, films project not
only something a character is perceiving, but also
something a character is thinking. The director’s
camera not only frames the perceptual dynamics
of the character’s (or someone else’s) body, but
it also captures the flow of attentional focalizations
through which the character selects ways of
relating the perceived dynamics to his / her earlier
experiences. It means that films allow one to
observe attentional processes that are
unobservable in normal conditions (even in
psychological experiments), let alone in texts
(where we do not directly observe anything, but
are engaged in reading only). Such a narrative
technique of the moving image helps the viewer
not only ‘experience’ the character’s living as it
is, in the flow, but also follow the process of reality
construction in the character’s world.
4. Embodiment of knowing: films, as said
before, project sensorimotor dynamics, thus
making bodily movements (gaze, gestures, etc.)
and sensoriality (hearing, seeing) observable.
A case study: a concept of time
reversibility in/through counterfactuals.
To demonstrate how effectively motion pictures
can be methodologically applied to linguistic
research, I will give one example that is connected
with the study of some fundamental concepts and
grammatical problems connected with them.
The concept of time, in particular, can be easily
approached from a dynamic perspective in which
we can more clearly see the experiential context
of time as a way of acting and then deduce
(or even observe) the attentional and referential
mechanisms underlying this acting. A choice of
those films which tell their story around or
throughout changing temporal reality will help. For
instance, Atonement (2007) is interesting in this
sense.
It is an if-only-I-had-not-done-it or it-
would-have-happened-differently story about
undoing the irreparable damage the main
character once caused to her loved ones. Right
from the point of dramatic and critical decision to
wrongfully testify against her sister’s boyfriend
and get him imprisoned amid the waging World
War II, Briony begins to live a life which will never
get back to normal. Her sense of guilt and regret
are portrayed as reflections upon the lived past
which repeatedly interrupt the linearity of her
experiential flow as well as the film’s storytelling.
Her attention is refocused on the earlier
experiences and these refocalizations are often
shown in reverse order to emphasize her desire
to ‘restore’ the past. In the end she manages to
beg forgiveness from her sister and her boyfriend,
but later we see that this never happened and
was part of her imagination. The people she
betrayed were killed in the war. It appears that
the bigger part of the story was told
counterfactually, from the as-if perspective.
Overwhelmed by the irreversible consequences
of her light-minded behavior (her sister and her
boyfriend’s death), the main character has created
a reality of her own (that comes out as another
narrative) and acts upon it to cope with a sense
of guilt. Throughout this reality she repeatedly goes
back to the moment of the regrettable wrongdoing,
enacting the “if-only-it-had-happened-otherwise”
cognitive program. This, in turn, illuminates the
cognitive mechanism of experience construction
in terms of counterfactuals (or the subjunctive, in
their linguistic abstraction).
The film director uses a number of
techniques to portray Briony’s experience, among
which flashback reversion is of the greatest
interest. It visualizes the reverse motion of the
mind, the refocalization of the character’s attention
on some earlier salient experience. In particular,
the farewell scene of Brinoy’s sister (Cecilia)
parting with her (Cecilia’s) boyfriend at the
doorstep of her mansion at the beginning of the
film is shown in reverse order in the middle of the
film to highlight the relational change which has
happened in Briony’s mind. This change of value
occurred right after the fatal mistake she made
to get her sister’s boyfriend (Robbie) imprisoned
and later killed in the war. She recognized this
tragical mistake and now goes back to the lived
experiences and replays them in reverse order.
In doing so, the narrator (Briony) decides to
construct a positively valued reality (the reality of
begging forgiveness) which dominates the
narrative and appears as a true story until her
confession in the final scene. At the end of the
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
173
A.S. Druzhinin. Motion Pictures as a Source of Empirical Language Data
film we see older Briony who has just finished a
novel Atonement about Cecilia and Robbie. She
says that her sister and Robbie reunited only in
the book, in reality they died and Briony never
met them to claim forgiveness after what
happened when she was a mindless teenager.
Briony’s confession is shown to us as two
sequences of moving images, the one is a negative
reality of Robbie and Cecilia dying in the war, the
second one is a positive, desired reality of Robbie
and Cecilia enjoying their holiday by the seaside
together.
The analysis of how older Briony’s mind
‘moves’ in her reflections on the past as shown
by the director in the last scene suggests that
the realities constructed are not of the ‘more
true’ or ‘less true’ kind, they belong to one and
the same level of actuality of the storyline: they
both are objects of Briony’s attention. Both
the death and the happy life of her sister are
depicted sequentially. Their counterfactuals
status emerges as a new understanding of the
past and a change of relation Briony produces
in her actuality (‘here and now’, at the moment
of answering the interviewer’s questions, at the
moment of regretting her mistakes and getting
more dissatisfied with her present life), not in
the ‘irreal’ world.
The enactive data provided in the motion
picture allow us to look at counterfactuals as a
way of semantic living rather than a grammatical
construction or logico-semantic structure. Briony
lived a ‘counterfactual life’ throughout the second
half of the story. Counterfactuals became for her
a way of dealing with her sense of guilt, with the
world that tragically changed for her the moment
she made a life-changing decision to testify against
her sister’s boyfriend. She enacted counterfactuals
in and through her reflections upon the past where
she re-organized the past experience by changing
the relational value of this experience from the
negative to the positive. The summary of our
findings are given in Table 2.
The findings will help us make a few
linguistic generalizations on counterfactuals.
Linguistically, counterfactuals are frames of
reference in which the agent reverses the past
time, or rather, his / her lived experiences, to
counterbalance what he / she is actually living in
the present. In other words, the value of the lived
experience is not satisfying for the agent to live
on and anticipate the coming changes in a normal,
linear direction; he / she begins to (reflectively)
change the direction of this experiential flow and
act upon this change by constructing new
experience out of the old one.
This complex, non-linear process of
attentional and experiential counterbalancing may
well explain the complex and non-linear
grammatical choices we make in our languaging.
Table 2. Counterfactuals as an experience (a case study of Atonement)
Step 
Research Procedure 
Results 
Step 1 
Hypothesizing 
time is specifically experienced in/through a counterfactual way of dealing with 
the world 
Step 2 
Observation and analysis: 
when / where? 
the experience is enacted after the character’s fatal mistake, in the circumstances of 
repentance and atoning 
Step 3 
Observation and analysis: 
why? 
the experience is enacted to deal with a sense of guilt, to beg forgiveness from 
the wrongfully betrayed people  
Step 4 
Observation and analysis: 
how? 
The experience is enacted 
attentionally: through refocalizations on the lived experiences, the refocalizations 
counterbalancing (helping to restore the balance in) the dynamics of the actual 
living; 
cognitively: through reflecting upon what happened in the past and acting upon 
this reflection (constructing a new experience by reverting the way the past 
experiences happened); 
relationally: through a change of value attached to the lived experience 
Step 5 
Synthesis and verification 
The investigation fits the following hypothesis: 
a concept of time reversibility is enacted in/through counterfactuals; the experiential 
result (the enactment) is counterbalancing reality 
174
ДИСКУССИИ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
Namely, the pattern If I only I had not done
such a mistake, everything would have
happened differently involves a number of
complicated and ‘illogical’ structures for a reason.
Contrasting negation (If I had ... = in fact, I don’t
have) helps to create a relational change and reverse
the experience, past tense forms specify what kind
of the lived experience we are reversing (in a
reflective abstraction) and ‘future-in-the past’ would
frames the result of this reversion, namely the
construction of a new, counterbalancing experience.
All in all, the counterfactual enactment of the
world creates counterbalancing reality in
referential frames of which we act to satisfy our
changing interests and desires.
To sum it up, the motion picture provided
significant data for a holistic understanding of
experience construction in terms of non-linear
temporal reality. Different techniques of film
making and our holistic perception of the story,
the character’s living, rather than his / her talking,
assured a maximum of methodological integration
in the observation and synthetical study of
languaging.
Conclusion
Motion pictures remain a good source of
enactive data for linguistic research unless they
are treated as texts. If they are, linguists find
themselves “epistemologically trapped in the
fragmentary understanding of language, culture
and cognition” [Kravchenko, 2016]. Texts will
never provide a whole picture of what human
language is because in texts a human cannot be
observed. In particular, texts are what we have
already produced in the process of our experience
organization, but they are far from this process
itself, they have very little to say about how,
where and when we organize our experience. If
we cannot investigate such factors, we cannot
construct a valid hypothesis about this or that
experiential item generating our recurrent
communicative behavior, or languaging dynamics.
If we cannot do so, we fail to meet the
requirements of scientific research to explain
“how something works always”.
Viewed holistically, motion pictures can
safely be used in the study of languaging as
experience construction because in them we can
observe actors acting upon, and enacting, bodily
dynamics. Just as our ‘moving’ attention selects
some part of our perceptual field to frame for
reference, the moving camera selects an image
to capture for the meaningful development of the
story. Just as the flow of our living causes us to
construct meaningful experience by relating one
experiential item to another, the developing story
of a film makes sense to let one event happen
after, before or during another. Just as for a
scientific understanding of reality we explain the
recurrent coherences of our experiential dynamics
across separate relational domains, films allow us
to look at the experiential dynamics of the
characters in totality which gives us a better
understanding of the latter’s behaviors.
Linell expresses hopes that computer-
supported visualization of languaging dynamics will
offer a methodological alternative to the product-
oriented approach of mainstream linguistics [Linell,
2005, p. 220]. Some work has been done in this
regard with Druzhinin et al. [2020] attempting to
investigate such relational phenomena as
dysphemisms and euphemisms in experiential
contexts on the basis of TV drama shows and
concluding that the distinction between the
‘phemes’ depends upon the experience of the
distinguisher. A lot of work is still to be done in
the area of linguistic and cross-disciplinary
research, and once we approach language in
experiential totality, as where and how we humans
organize our being, we will be able to write the
long sought-after linguistic “recipes that work
always”.
REFERENCES
Bakhtin M.M., 1981. The Dialogical Imagination:
Four Essays by M.M. Bakhtin. Austin,
University of Texas Press. 480 p.
Bridgman P.W., 1958. The Logic of Modern Physics.
New York, Macmillan, vol. 3. 246 p. (First
Published in 1927).
Ceccato S., Zonta B., 1980. Linguaggio, Consapevolezza,
Pensiero. Milan, Feltrinelli. 269 p.
Druzhinin A.S., Fomina T.A., Polyakov O.G., 2020.
Evfemizmy, disfemizmy, ortofemizmy
ieksperientsialnyi kontekst: kholisticheskii
vzglyad na lingvisticheskuyu problemu
[Euphemisms, Dysphemisms, Orthophemisms
and Experiential Context: A Holistic View of the
Linguistic Problem]. Yazyk i kultura [Language
and Culture], no. 50 (2), pp. 23-40.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
A.S. Druzhinin. Motion Pictures as a Source of Empirical Language Data
Foerster H. von, 2003. Understanding Understanding:
Essays on Cybernetics and Cognition. New
York, Berlin, Springer Science & Business Media.
362 p.
Glasersfeld E. von, 1995. Radical Constructivism:
A Way of Knowing and Learning. Bristol, Falmer
Press. 213 p.
Glasersfeld E. von, Ackermann E.K., 2011. “Reflections
on the Concept of Experience and the Role of
Consciousness”. Unfinished Fragments.
Constructivist Foundations, no. 6, pp. 193-203.
Goodwin C., 2000. “Action and Embodiment Within
Situated Human Interaction”. Journal of
pragmatics, no. 32, pp. 1489-1522.
James W., 1890. Principles of Psychology. New York,
Henry Holt and Company, vol. 1. 716 p.
Kravchenko A.V., 2016. Constructivism and the
Epistemological Trap 
of 
Language.
Constructivist Foundations, no. 12, pp. 39-41.
Linell P., 2005. The Written Language Bias in
Linguistics: Its Nature, Origins and
Transformations. London, Routledge. 256 p.
Maturana H., 1988. Reality: The Search for Objectivity
or the Quest for a Compelling Argument. The
Irish Journal of Psychology, no. 9, pp. 25-82.
Maturana H., 2006. Self-Consciousness: How? When?
Where? Constructivist Foundations, no. 3,
pp. 91-102.
Maturana H., 2012. Reflections on My Collaboration
with Francisco Varela. Constructivist
Foundations, no. 7, pp. 155-164.
Maturana H.R., Verden-Zöller G., 2008. The Origin of
Humanness in the Biology of Love. London,
Andrews UK Limited. 252 p.
Peters J.D., 1999. Speaking into the Air: A History of
the Idea of Communication. Chicago, University
of Chicago Press. 304 p.
Piaget J., 1937. La Construction du Réel Chez L’Enfant.
Neuchâtel, Delachaux et Niestlé. 345 p.
Rickford J.R., 1999. The Ebonics Controversy in My
Backyard: A Sociolinguist’s Experiences and
Reflections. Journal of Sociolinguistics, no. 3,
pp. 267-275.
Valéry P., 1957. OEuvres. Paris, Bibliotheque de la
Pleiade. 1872 p.
Varela F.J., Thompson E., Rosh E., 1993. The Embodied
Mind: Cognitive Science and Human
Experience. Massachusetts, MIT Press. 309 p.
Vygotsky L.S., 1962. Thought and Language.
Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press. 168 p.
Information About the Author
Andrey S. Druzhinin, Candidate Sciences (Philology), Associate Professor, English Language
Department no. 3, MGIMO University, Prosp. Vernadskogo, 76, 119454 Moscow, Russia,
andrey.druzhinin.89@mail.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9971-4019
Информация об авторе
Андрей Сергеевич Дружинин, кандидат филологических наук, доцент кафедры англий-
ского языка № 3,  Московский государственный институт международных отношений (универси-
тет) МИД России, просп. Вернадского, 76, 119454 г. Москва, Россия, andrey.druzhinin.89@mail.ru,
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9971-4019
