 Uryvskaya T.A., 2021
114
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 1
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ

www.volsu.ru
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.1.9
UDC 811.581’373.611 
Submitted: 04.06.2020
LBC 81.711-20 
Accepted: 02.12.2020
SPECIFIC FEATURES OF LETTERED WORDS’ INTEGRATION 
IN THE GRAPHIC, PHONETIC AND GRAMMATICAL  ASPECTS 
OF THE CHINESE LANGUAGE
Tatiana A. Uryvskaya
MGIMO University, Moscow, Russia
Abstract. This paper is devoted to the specific features of lettered words’ integration in the graphic, phonetic 
and grammatical aspects of the Chinese language. The author has analyzed a number of local and foreign studies, 
covering the main patterns of the lettered words’ integration. Based on Liu Yongquan’s studies, it was concluded 
that it’s important to strictly follow letters’ case. The case difference can distinguish semantics of different lettered 
words. Native Chinese speakers with high linguistic competence are able to recognize various lettered words in print, 
but they may not know how to read them out loud. Therefore, the pronunciation of lettered words is associated with 
a number of issues: the choice of pronunciation standard, the differentiation of initialisms and acronyms, the choice 
which syllable to stress. Based on the results of previous research, different ways of how borrowed lettered words 
respond to the grammatical norms of the Chinese language were identified. The empirical analysis was performed 
with lettered words extracted by the method of continuous sampling from lexicographic sources. Using the cases 
described in the paper, the author has proved that in addition to such word-formation processes as compounding, 
semi-affixation, syntactic and morphological transposition, lettered words can also be formed and transformed with 
morphological contraction.
Key words: Chinese, lettered words, abbreviations, initialisms, Chinese hybrid words, assimilations, word-
formation.
Citation. Uryvskaya T.A. Specific Features of Lettered Words’ Integration in the Graphic, Phonetic and 
Grammatical Aspects of the Chinese Language. Vestnik Volgogradskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2. 
Yazykoznanie [Science Journal of Volgograd State University. Linguistics], 2021, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 114-122. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.1.9
УДК 811.581’373.611 
Дата поступления статьи: 04.06.2020
ББК 81.711-20 
Дата принятия статьи: 02.12.2020
ОСОБЕННОСТИ ИНТЕГРАЦИИ БУКВЕННЫХ СЛОВ 
В ГРАФИЧЕСКУЮ, ФОНЕТИЧЕСКУЮ И ГРАММАТИЧЕСКУЮ СИСТЕМЫ 
КИТАЙСКОГО ЯЗЫКА
Татьяна Александровна Урывская
Московский государственный институт международных отношений (Университет) МИД России, 
г. Москва, Россия
Аннотация. В статье освещаются особенности интеграции буквенных слов в графическую, фонети-
ческую и грамматическую системы китайского языка. Проанализированы научные труды отечественных и 
зарубежных лингвистов, исследовавших буквенные слова в китайском языке. С опорой на труды Лю Юн-
цюаня показано, что при написании буквенных слов китайского языка значимость имеет регистр букв, раз-
граничивающий лексические единицы. Поскольку носители китайского языка с высокой лингвистической 
компетенцией способны распознавать различные буквенные слова в печати, но могут не знать правил их 
чтения, в лингвистике обсуждается ряд вопросов, связанных с произношением буквенных слов: выбор 
произносительной нормы для каждого вида буквенных лексем, дифференциация буквенных аббревиатур 
и акронимов, постановка ударения. С учетом имеющихся по исследуемой проблематике лингвистических 
работ определены некоторые особенности подчинения буквенных лексем грамматическим нормам совре-
менного китайского языка. Материалом для эмпирического анализа стали буквенные слова, извлеченные 
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 1
115
T.A. Uryvskaya. Specific Features of Lettered Words’ Integration
методом сплошной выборки из специализированных лексикографических источников. Установлено, что для 
создания буквенных слов в китайском языке, наряду со словосложением, полуаффиксацией, синтаксической 
транспозицией, морфологической транспозицией, применяется и такая словообразовательная модель, как 
морфемная контракция.
Ключевые слова: китайский язык, буквенные слова, аббревиатура, аббревиатура инициального типа, 
слово-метис, ассимиляция, словообразование.
Цитирование. Урывская Т. А. Особенности интеграции буквенных слов в графическую, фонетическую 
и грамматическую системы китайского языка // Вестник Волгоградского государственного университета. 
Серия 2, Языкознание. – 2021. – Т. 20, № 1. – С. 114–122. – (На англ. яз.). – DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/
jvolsu2.2021.1.9
Introduction
According to the definition of the Chinese 
linguist Liu Yongquan, one of the pioneers in this 
field of research, the lettered words of the Chinese 
language (汉语字母词) are “the words whose 
structure includes Chinese characters and letters 
of foreign alphabets (mainly Latin letters) or 
words completely consisting of letters of foreign 
alphabets. Examples of the first type are B 超, 
卡拉 OK; examples of the second type are CD, 
UFO... ” [Liu, 1994, p. 7].
Despite the fact that the full definition of 
these lexical items was given only in 1994, we 
can find many facts confirming that the history of 
their existence in the Chinese language has more 
than a hundred years. The Chinese researcher 
Dong Ming in the article “Justifying Chinese 
Latin Abbreviations” (“汉语字母词存在的合
理性”) cited the fact that X 光线 was included 
in the “Xin Erya” (“新尔雅”) dictionary in 1903 
[Dong, 2014].
Li Xiaohua in her article «Review of the 
issues related to the inclusion of lettered words in 
dictionaries» (“浅议字母词收入辞书问题”) noted 
an increase of lettered words’ usage during The 
May Fourth Movement. Li Xiaohua, referring to 
Liu Yonghan, also gives examples of the historical 
appearance of lettered words in Chinese literature 
of that period, in particular, 阿 Q from “The True 
Story of Ah Q” in 1921 “阿 Q 正传” ), N 先生 
from “The Story of Hair” 1920 (“头发的故事”) 
[Li, 2014, p. 46].
Research material and methods
The material base for the study is specialized 
dictionaries that give a definition to many 
lettered words of the Chinese language. With the 
appearance and wider spread of lettered words 
in the Chinese language, it became necessary 
to give an accurate, full definition of the most 
commonly used lettered items in various fields. 
In 1996, the 3rd edition of the “Contemporary 
Chinese Dictionary” (现代汉语词典, hereinafter 
referred as the CCD) included definitions of 
39 lettered words. Inclusion of lettered words in 
the corresponding section of the CCD has become 
systematic and continues to this day. In the 
7th edition of the CCD (2016) 235 lettered words 
were included in the section (CCD, 1996; CCD, 
2016). The data from the “Chinese lettered words 
dictionary” by Liu Yongquan, which contains the 
most complete and systematized list of lettered 
words of the contemporary Chinese language 
also was used as the research material. The main 
methodology is the continuous sampling method, 
as well as the method of structural and component 
analysis of lettered words.
Regular appearance of lettered words in 
the Chinese press not only confirms the presence 
of these lexemes in contemporary Chinese, but 
also indicates the communicative tolerance of 
Chinese speakers to them [Veselova, Uryvskaya, 
2019]. In the author’s opinion, the following 
factors contributed to this communicative 
tolerance: the need to fill the gaps in the lexical 
system; the speech efforts saving’s principle; 
psychological factor [Alikberova, Uryvskaya, 
2016]. It is worth mentioning that psychological 
factor is often caused by the desire to give one’s 
speech special novelty and relevance, as well as 
emphasize the level of education and language 
competence, which leads to the extensive use of 
lettered words by Chinese speakers. The desire of 
native Chinese speakers to transform their speech 
with foreign inclusions and to impress with their 
intelligence is common both to an average society 
member and representatives of the political elite 
of China. For example, H. Kissinger, an American 
116
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 1
politician, diplomat and expert in the field of 
international relations, in his book “On China”, 
published for the first time in 2011, wrote about 
the former General Secretary of the Chinese 
Communist Party, Jiang Zemin: “He took pride, 
sometimes exuberantly so, in his talent for foreign 
languages and knowledge of Western music. With 
non-Chinese visitors, he regularly incorporated 
English or Russian or even Romanian expressions 
into his presentations to emphasize a point...”. 
In the author’s opinion, thereby H. Kissinger 
indicates loyalty of Jiang Zemin to foreign 
borrowings [Kissinger, 2015, p. 478].
Based on the data of a sociological survey 
among native Chinese speakers, which was 
outlined in the article “Chinese lettered words: 
barbarism or assimilated borrowing?” in 2019 
[Uryvskaya, Veselova, 2019, pp. 431-446], we 
can draw certain conclusions about high level of 
communicative tolerance of a part of the Chinese 
society to these lexical items and effective 
assimilation of the lettered words in the Chinese 
language. However, despite the general tolerance, 
lettered words in the language system sometimes 
can also cause a negative response. Opponents 
of lettered words call them an unnatural element 
imposed by Western culture. According to 
their opinion, among many attempts to latinize 
Chinese writing, lettered words have inflicted the 
most serious damage on the Chinese language 
[Dong, 2014]. Therefore, we can see a mixed 
attitude of native Chinese speakers towards this 
phenomenon, which, however, does not prevent 
assimilation of these lexical items into the Chinese 
language system. Further we will evaluate these 
processes in detail.
Results and discussion
Specific features 
of lettered words’ integration 
in the graphic system 
of the Chinese language
There are clear rules of writing Chinese 
characters, which is not the case with the lettered 
words of the Chinese language. Analyzing the 
rules of writing lettered words of the Chinese 
language, Liu Yongquan has identified four 
categories of lettered words with different features 
and rules of writing.
The first category includes professional 
vocabulary and scientific or technical language: 
IMF – International Monetary Fund, 国际货币
基金组织; CPU – Central Processing Unit, 中
央处理器 [Liu, 2002]. Most of the words in this 
category are represented by initialisms, and they 
should be written in uppercase.
The second category includes words that 
indicate units of measure, for example, cl – 
‘centiliter’, 厘升 or mm – ‘millimeter’, 毫米 
[Liu, 2002]. These words should be written in 
lowercase.
The third category is represented by words, 
which can be written both in lowercase and 
uppercase letters. For example, Internet / internet / 
INTERNET, 互联网 [Liu, 2002], or SOHO / 
SoHo – Small office home office, 家庭办公室, 
家庭企业 [Liu, 2002]. The choice of lowercase 
or uppercase letters is insignificant, any of the 
writing ways will be correct.
The fourth category consists of words 
containing both lowercase and uppercase letters, 
for example, IPv4 – Internet Protocol version 4, 
互联网的网络通信协议的4号版本 [Liu, 2002] 
or dBASE – data BASE, 数据库 [Liu, 2002]. The 
order of lowercase and uppercase letters in the 
composition of such words is fixed, they have no 
alternative writings.
In some cases, the choice of uppercase 
or lowercase letters in lettered words writing 
determines their semantics. Therefore, when 
using lettered words, it is necessary to clearly 
determine which of the four categories a particular 
lettered word belongs to and what its correct 
writing should be. In the variety of the Chinese 
lettered words, we can find following examples: 
CD, Cd and cd [Liu, 2002], where CD stands for 
Compact Disc, 光碟; Cd – (from lat.) Cadmium, 
镉; and cd  «candela», 坎德拉 is the base unit of 
luminous intensity.
Specific features 
of lettered words’ integration 
in the phonetic system 
of the Chinese language
Even though lettered words have already 
become an integral part of the lexical system 
of the contemporary Chinese language, most 
of them are represented by borrowings from 
other languages. Nowadays, the lettered words 
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 1
117
T.A. Uryvskaya. Specific Features of Lettered Words’ Integration
of the Chinese language are increasingly used 
not only in written, but also in oral speech by 
native Chinese speakers, so the question of the 
pronunciation standards for such words arises 
quite logically. H. Riha, an American researcher 
of Chinese lettered words, notes that “educated 
Chinese speakers may recognize a variety of 
lettered words in print but may not necessarily 
need to say them aloud and may not know their 
pronunciation” [Riha, 2010, p. 47]. Lettered 
words in contemporary Chinese are more often 
found in print and less often in spoken language, 
so native Chinese speakers rarely could learn their 
correct pronunciation by ear. H. Riha also noted 
the fact that there are no rules for reading lettered 
words in Chinese specialized dictionaries [Riha, 
2010, p. 47].
According to the conclusions made by Liu 
Yongquan in 2002, reading and pronunciation of 
lettered words involves the following questions:
A. The choice of pronunciation standard in 
relation to lettered words.
B. Continuous or separate reading of lettered 
words.
C. Accentuation while reading lettered 
words.
With regard to the first question, Liu 
Yongquan believes that lettered words 
borrowed from foreign languages are read in 
accordance with the rules for reading letters 
of the English alphabet, and not only words 
from the English language follow this rule 
[Liu, 2002]. As a part of an experiment in 
identifying the functioning of lettered words 
in native Chinese speakers’ speech (hereinafter 
referred to as ‘the experiment’) described in 
the PhD thesis, K.A. Markina distinguishes 
the following patterns:
A) as lettered words adapt to the basic 
typological features of the Chinese language, they 
are read by native Chinese speakers ‘by syllables’ 
(especially initialisms).The tendency is based on 
the fact that the pronunciation of the letters in 
borrowed initialisms is somewhat similar to the 
pronunciation of Chinese syllables: C [si] = 戏 
(xì) ‘game’, D [di] = 地 (dì) ‘earth’, I [ai ] = 爱 
(ài) ‘love’, P [pi] = 皮 (pí) ‘skin’ etc. [Markina, 
2008, p. 83];
B) in pronunciation of:
a. Borrowed words in their full spelling 
(spelled-out words);
b. Abbreviations consisting of letters that do 
not have complete phonological correspondences 
among Chinese syllables;
c. Abbreviations that do not correspond to 
the fixed sequence of syllabic elements in Chinese 
language.
Native Chinese speakers with high linguistic 
competence tend to get as close as possible 
to the pronunciation of word elements in 
accordance with the rules for reading letters of 
the English alphabet. At the same time, native 
Chinese speakers with low linguistic competence 
pronounce them in accordance with pinyin 
phonetic alphabet pronunciation or with the 
established pronunciation in Chinese language. In 
this case “unsystematic distortions of the phonetic 
appearance of initialisms are observed” [Markina, 
2008, p. 84]. H. Riha believes that initialisms are 
usually spelled by native Chinese speakers, and 
the letters are pronounced in accordance with the 
English reading rules. “As pronunciation of many 
acronyms borrowed from English is based on 
their English pronunciation, APEC is presumably 
pronounced as [eipɛk] and IBM as [aibiɛm]. 
When speakers do not know that a particular 
acronym is conventionally pronounced as a word 
in Chinese, they pronounce it as an initialism” 
[Riha, 2010, p. 47].
Within the framework of this issue, local 
and foreign researches touch upon the question 
of pronunciation of Chinese lettered items formed 
on a basis of pinyin. Liu Yongquan pointed out 
that there is currently no single rule for reading 
such abbreviations. Nevertheless, the scholar 
notices the propensity of Chinese speakers to 
pronounce them in accordance with the rules for 
reading English letters [Liu, 2002, pp. 85-90]. 
However, analysis of the pronunciation variants 
of such abbreviations provided by K.A. Markina 
is more detailed:
A) in accordance with Chinese reading of 
the syllables in the corresponding full words.
GG = 哥哥 gēge ‘elder brother’.
B) in accordance with English names 
of letters that constitute abbreviation. HSK 
(汉语水平考试 (Hànyǔ shuǐpíng kǎoshì) ‘the 
standardized test of Standard Chinese language’) 
as [eitʃ] – [es] – [kei].
C) multiple variants of pronunciation occur 
due to inaccurate identification of the source of 
abbreviation.
118
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 1
GB = a) 国标 guóbiāo ‘state standard’,
 b) [d3i bi] – Great Britain.
Regarding the second question, Liu 
Yongquan expressed an opinion on the 
existing variability in reading of initialisms. 
Abbreviations that have vowels in the middle 
can be taken for a single syllable or as a chain 
of independent syllables and pronounced as 
one unit (for example ‘SOHO’ – ‘SO/HO/’). At 
the same time, abbreviations that do not have a 
sequential alternation of consonants and vowels 
(for example, ‘MRI’, ‘GSM’) are read letter-
by-letter according to the patterns discussed 
before. However, there are abbreviations that 
have two options of reading – both as a single 
syllable and as a chain of independent syllables 
(for example ‘ISO’ – “ai es əʊ” and “i: so”) 
[Liu, 2002]. According to the experiment 
of K.A. Markina, “the overall statistics of 
reading abbreviations that suggest such dual 
pronunciation, is approximately at the ratio of 
50/50” [Markina, 2008, p. 100].
In relation to the third question on 
accentuation of lettered words, Liu Yongquan has 
only pointed out the need for correct accentuation 
in lettered words to avoid the distortion of their 
phonetic form. The questions of accentuation 
in lettered words were out of the scope of 
K.A. Markina’s experiment, but the problem of 
the presence or absence of tones in the syllables 
was raised. According to the data, in the process 
of ascribing tones to the syllables in borrowed 
lettered words all tones of Chinese language 
were involved, with the neutral tone being rarely 
ascribed to syllables in lettered words [Markina, 
2008, p. 106]. This is explained by the perception 
of lettered words (particularly abbreviations) by 
native speakers as single syllables or chains of 
independent syllables. While reading lettered 
words, native speakers naturally ascribe a tone 
(one of the basic parts of Chinese syllable) to 
almost all syllables.
The experiment revealed that despite the 
existing differences in choosing a tone while 
reading lettered words and abbreviations, the top 
choice of the respondents is usually the first (flat) 
tone. In our point of view, the first (flat) tone is 
distinguished by the special duration and height, 
which can technically correspond to the stress in 
the original lettered word. In terms of acoustic 
characteristics, the syllable with the first tone is 
closer to the stressed syllables of the borrowed 
lettered words from the English language, for 
instance. This may be due to the fact that its 
duration is similar to such a basic characteristic 
of the stressed syllable in the English language 
as duration.
The process of subordination 
of the borrowed lettered words 
to the grammar standards 
of the Chinese language
As was already noticed, there are several 
reasons for the emergence and spread of lettered 
borrowings in the Chinese language: the need 
to fill the gaps in the lexical system; the speech 
efforts saving’s principle; psychological factor. 
However, the participation of these lexical units 
in the word-formation processes of the Chinese 
language is a solid proof of their transition to 
the status of ‘lettered words of the Chinese 
language’.
Hybrid words are the products of such word-
formation models in the Chinese language as 
compounding and semi-affixation. The following 
example illustrates the participation of lettered 
borrowings in the process of compounding 
(definitive type):
CIF 价 – CIF jià, CIF – terms of delivery that 
include Cost, Insurance and Freight, where CIF – 
from the English Cost, Insurance and Freight, and 
价 jià – ‘price, cost’.
Another example shows the participation of 
lettered borrowings in semi-affixation process:
IT 化  – IT huà, IT – ‘process of 
implementation / transition to information 
technology’, and 化 huà – semi-suffix. This 
semi – suffix forms a large number of words 
denoting the process of action, transformation, 
and transition of an object to another state 
[Gorelov, 1984, p. 61].
Lettered words usually enter the Chinese 
language with the original established semantic 
meaning and belonging to a particular lexical and 
grammatical category. The transition of original 
lettered words from one lexical and grammatical 
category to another is also possible – as a result 
of the participation of these lexical items in 
such word-formation processes as syntactic 
transposition and morphological transposition. 
According to the definition of V.I. Gorelov, 
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 1
119
T.A. Uryvskaya. Specific Features of Lettered Words’ Integration
syntactic transposition is not accompanied 
by the change of lexical and morphological 
environment – the result of this process is only 
the change of syntactic functions of the original 
lexical unit [Gorelov, 1984, p. 93]. For example, 
吃完饭谁也别走，咱们卡拉 OK [Liu, 2002] – 
‘do not leave after the meal, we will sing karaoke’. 
卡拉 OK ‘karaoke’ is a borrowing from the 
Japanese language, in which 卡拉 is a phonetic 
calque from Japanese ‘カラ’ ‘empty’ and ‘OK’ 
from English ‘orchestra’ [Liu, 2002]. Initially, 
‘karaoke’ meant sound equipment that allows 
performing songs to the backing track (Liu, 
p. 288). However, in the example, the word was 
syntactically transposed, which determined the 
transition of the word from the category of nouns 
to the category of verbs.
Morphological transposition (conversion) 
implies a change in lexical and morphological 
environment [Gorelov, 1984, p. 95]. For 
example, 你的企业 IT 了吗? – ‘Has your 
company applied IT?’ [Liu, 2002, pp. 85-
90]. The term ‘IT’ belongs to the lexical and 
grammatical category of nouns, but in the 
example, it was used as a processual verb. This is 
evidenced by its position in the sentence and the 
grammatical indicator 了 (located after verbs 
and some adjectives according to the rules). As 
a verb, ‘IT’ acquires the meaning ‘the process 
of implementation and application of Internet 
technologies’.
In the Chinese language, in view of the 
morphological and semantic significance of 
hyphenation, compounding is one of the leading 
and most effective ways of word formation 
and word stock replenishment. However, 
according to I.D. Klenin and V.F. Shchichko, 
the development of polysyllabic lexical items 
also gave rise to the opposite tendency of 
reducing polysyllabic items to a disyllabic 
standard more often than to a trisyllabic or 
quadrisyllabic structures [Klenin, Shchichko, 
2013, p. 129]. Therefore, the tendency to exceed 
the standard of dissyllabic form within the 
framework of the compounding is compensated 
by such phenomenon as morphemic contraction 
(which reverts the word to the dissyllabic form). 
Eventually, due to its effectiveness and active 
use of its products, this process has become 
one of the ways of word formation in the 
Chinese language. According to the definition 
of V.I. Gorelov, this method is a special kind of 
abbreviation typical of the Chinese language by 
its morphological characteristics. It is a process 
of exclusion of individual morphemes from the 
composition of a polysyllabic word or phrase.
Previously, this method of formation of 
new words was applied only to hieroglyphic 
words of the Chinese language and, according 
to V.I. Gorelov, was divided into several types:
1. Morphemic contraction of trisyllabic 
lexical units.
飞机场 (fly – machine – field) → 机场 
(aerodrome) [Gorelov, 1984, p. 87].
2. Morphemic contraction of quadrisyllabic 
lexical units.
北京大学 (Beijing University) → 北大 
[Gorelov, 1984, p. 88].
3. Morphemic contraction of pentasyllabic 
lexical units.
语言研究所 (speech – language – to 
investigate – place) → 语言所 (institute of 
linguistics) [Gorelov, 1984, p. 89].
4. Morphemic contraction of a special type.
a) the merging of two words which have a 
common postpositive morpheme – the formation 
of one trisyllabic unit. There is a copulative bond 
between the first morphemes.
明天 (tomorrow) + 后天 (the day after 
tomorrow) → 明后天 (tomorrow or the day after 
tomorrow) [Gorelov, 1984, p. 90].
b) the merging of several words (usually 
with an identical morpheme) – the formation of 
an abbreviated word, including a numeral, which 
indicates the number of words involved in the 
contraction process.
农业、农村、农民问题 (problems of 
agriculture, village, and rural population) – 三农问题.
However, with the emergence and integration 
of lettered words into the lexical system of 
the Chinese language, lettered words and their 
alphabetical components began to follow the rules 
of morphemic contraction.
Having investigated the dictionary ‘汉语字
母词词典’ written by Liu Yongquan in 2008, we 
pointed out a number of lettered words, which, 
in our opinion, are the products of morphemic 
contraction. They demonstrate the accuracy of 
the conclusion that there is a process of lettered 
words’ subordination to the grammatical rules of 
the Chinese language. The lexemes selected may 
be divided into several groups:
120
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 1
Group 1:
a) Truncation of letter component of a hybrid 
word on a par with truncation of morphemes of 
postpositive hieroglyphic component:
USB 闪盘
→
U 盘
USB – flash drive (Liu, 
p. 244)
b) Truncation of letter component of a 
hybrid word and the use of a monomorphic 
postpositive hieroglyphic component:
GRE 族
→
G 族
people taking GRE test to study 
abroad (Liu, p. 105)
Group 2:
a) The merging of two hybrid words which 
have a common postpositive morpheme and 
truncation of the letter components of these words. 
The component in an abbreviated word is spelled 
as one letter, which is semantically significant for 
both original abbreviations:
MBA 族 + 
MPA 族
→
М 族
trainees or graduates of the 
MBA and MPA programs 
(Liu, p. 158)
b) The merging of two or more hybrid words 
which have a common postpositive morpheme 
and truncation of letter components of these 
words. The component in anabbreviated word 
is spelled as one letter combination, which is 
common for all words in contraction process:
What 词 + 
When 词 + 
Where 词 + 
Which 词…  
→
Wh-词
Wh-question words of 
the English language 
(Liu, p. 255)
Group 3:
a) Abbreviated hybrid words, which imply 
a hieroglyphic numeral (the number of combined 
words), a letter component (common to all 
words combined), and a hieroglyphic component 
indicating the meaning of abbreviated hybrid word:
Communication + 
Computer +
Control + 革命
→
三 C
革命
the implementation 
of communication 
computerization, 
and management 
a u t o m a t i o n 
processes (Liu, 
p. 291)
b) Abbreviated hybrid words, which imply an 
Arabic numeral (the number of combined words) a 
letter component (common to all words combined), 
and a hieroglyphic component indicating the 
meaning of abbreviated hybrid word:
Clean +
Cycle +
Control +
原则
→ 3С 原则
principles of urban waste 
management: prevention 
of waste generation, 
comprehensive waste 
utilization, appropriate 
measures in waste 
management (Liu, 
p. 276)
c) Abbreviated hybrid words, which imply 
a hieroglyphic numeral (the number of combined 
words) and a letter component (common to all 
combined words):
Technology +
Trade +
Tribes
→ 三T
technology, trade and the 
collectivist spirit (Liu, 
p. 292)
d) Abbreviated hybrid words, which imply 
an Arabic numeral (the number of combined 
words) and a letter component (common to all 
combined words):
Reduce +
Reuse +
Recycle
→
3R 
modern environmental 
requirements (waste-
reduction, renewable energy 
sources, and reuse) (Liu, 
p. 278)
e) The merging of two groups of foreign 
words, distinguished by the principle of having 
a common letter component. In an abbreviated 
lettered word, the first hieroglyphic numeral (the 
number of words combined in the first group) and 
the letter component (common to all combined 
words of the first group) are followed by the 
second hieroglyphic numeral (the number of 
combined words in the second group) and the 
letter component (common to all combined words 
of the second group):
Computer +
Communication +
Control;
factory
Automation +
office
Automation +
home
Automation +
agricultural
Automation
→
三C
四A
computerization, 
communication, 
control; automation 
o f  i n d u s t r i a l 
enterprises, office, 
household and 
agriculture) (Liu, 
p. 291)
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 1
121
T.A. Uryvskaya. Specific Features of Lettered Words’ Integration
Conclusion
Lettered words emerged in Chinese print at 
the beginning of the 20th century. By the middle 
of the century, they began to appear in Chinese 
literature, and due to the new realia of China, 
beginning with the 1978 political course, they are 
gaining popularity nowadays.
The article is based on a series of observations 
on the lettered words’ integration into the Chinese 
language made by the author in the course of 
analysis of lettered words’ dictionaries published 
in China in the period of 1996–2016.
Firstly, we have analyzed a number of local 
and foreign researches, covering main issues 
regarding specific features of various types of 
lettered words’ integration into the phonetic and 
graphic systems of the Chinese language.
Secondly, the achievements of previous 
research made it possible to identify the 
peculiarities of subordination of borrowed lettered 
words to the grammatical standards of the Chinese 
language. The cases described in this paper prove 
that, in addition to such word-formation processes 
as compounding, semi-affixation, syntactic and 
morphological transposition, lettered words are 
also subject to morphological contraction. In our 
opinion, the expansion of the range of lettered 
words’ grammatical functions indicates a high 
degree of assimilation of these lexical items into 
the Chinese language.
The Chinese language is a communication 
instrument of citizens of the state that occupies 
an increasingly prominent place in political and 
economic arenas of the world. The investigation 
of the main vectors of intralingual changes in 
the contemporary Chinese language and their 
motives are relevant areas of research. Nowadays, 
the leadership of PRC shows commitment to 
preserving and maintaining Chinese identity and 
traditions. The Chinese language and Chinese 
characters are a huge layer of a unique culture. 
The emergence, distribution and assimilation of 
lettered words certainly have direct impact on 
the traditions of this language, to a certain extent 
determining the ways of its development. In this 
regard, we believe that the status of Chinese 
lettered words, the legitimacy of their usage, as 
well as the rules regulating their writing, reading, 
and grammatical functions are relevant discussion 
topics in Chinese philology.
REFERENCES
Alikberova A.R., Uryvskaya T.A., 2016. Modern 
Trends in Chinese Language: Integration 
of Letter Words into the Language System. 
Uchenye Zapiski Kazanskogo Universiteta. 
Seriia «Gumanitarnye nauki», vol. 158, no. 6, 
pp. 1592-1600.
Gorelov V.I., 1984. Leksikologiya kitayskogo yazyka 
[Chinese Language Lexicology]. Moscow, 
Prosveshchenie Publ. 216 p.
Khamatova А.А., 2012. Trends of the 
Development of the Chinese Vocabulary 
in the Beginning of the XXI Century. Vestnik 
Irkutskogo gosudarstvennogo lingvisticheskogo 
universiteta, no. 4 (21), pp. 9-13.
Kissinger H., 2015. O Kitaye [On China]. Moscow, 
AST Publ. 635 p.
Klenin I.D., Shchichko V.F., 2013. Leksikologiya 
kitayskogo yazyka [Chinese Language Lexicology]. 
Moscow, Vostochnaya kniga Publ. 273 p.
Markina K.A., 2008. Novye tendencii v razvitii kitajskoj 
leksiki: bukvennye slova kitajskogo jazyka 
kak projavlenie ego integracii s jelementami 
inoj tipologii: diss. cand. phylol. nauk [New 
Tendencies in the Development of Modern 
Chinese Words: Chinese Littered Words as 
the Manifestation of Its Integration with Its 
Integration with the Elements of the Different 
Typology. Cand. philol. sci. diss.]. Moscow. 
180 p.
Riha H., 2010. Lettered Words in Chinese: Roman 
Letters as Morpheme-Syllables. Working Papers 
in Linguistics, no. 59, pp. 44-51.
Uryvskaya T.A., Veselova L.S., 2019. Chinese Lettered 
Words: Barbarism or Assimilated Borrowing? 
Vestnik of Saint Petersburg University. Asian 
and African Studies, vol. 11, iss. 4, pp. 431-446. 
DOI: 10.21638/spbu13.2019.402.
Veselova L.S., Uryvskaya T.A., 2019. About 
Communicative Tolerance of Chinese 
Speakers to Lettered Words. Sbornik statey i 
dokladov uchastnikov XII Mezhdunarodnoy 
nauchnoprakticheskoy konferentsii «Rossiya – 
Kitay: istoriya i kultura» [Proceedings of the 
12th International Conference “Russia – China: 
History and Culture”]. Kazan, «Fen» AN RT 
Publ. pp. 103-107.
Dong Ming, 2014. Hanyu zimuci cunzaide helixing 
[Justifying Chinese Latin Abbreviations]. 
Journal of Zhejiang Gongshang University, 
vol. 125, no. 2, pp. 45-52. (In Chinese).
Li Xiaohua, 2014. Qianyi zimuci shouru cishu wenti 
[Review of the Issues Related to the Inclusion 
of Lettered Words in Dictionaries]. Modern 
Chinese, no.6, pp. 46-48. (In Chinese).
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 1
Liu Yоngquan, 1994. Tantan zimuci [Talk About 
Lettered Words]. Language Planning, no. 10, 
pp. 7-9. (In Chinese).
Liu Yоngquan, 2002. Guanyu hanyu zimucide wenti 
[The Issue of Lettered Words in Chinese]. Applied 
linguistics, no. 1, pp. 85-90. (In Chinese).
Tang Jingqiong,  2013. Zimuci ru “Xiandai 
hanyu cidian” [Lettered Words Enter the 
Contemporary Chinese Dictionary]. Journal of 
Suzhou University of Science and Technology 
(Social Science), vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 104-108. 
(In Chinese).
DICTIONARIES
Liu – Liu Yоngquan. Hanyu zimuci cidian [Chinese 
Lettered Words Dictionary]. [S. l.], Foreign 
Language Teaching and Research Press, 2008. 
332 p. (In Chinese).
CCD, 1996 – Contemporary Chinese Dictionary. 
3rd ed. Beijing, The Commercial Press, 1996. 
1832 p. (In Chinese).
CCD, 2016 – Contemporary Chinese Dictionary. 7rd ed. 
Beijing, The Commercial Press, 2016. 1799 p. 
(In Chinese).
Information About the Author
Tatiana A. Uryvskaya, Candidate for a Degree, Lecturer, Department of Chinese, Vietnamese, 
Thai and Laotian Languages, MGIMO University, Prosp. Vernadskogo, 76, 119454 Moscow, Russia, 
uryvski@yahoo.com, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0146-1365
Информация об авторе
Татьяна Александровна Урывская, соискатель ученой степени кандидата наук, преподава-
тель кафедры китайского, вьетнамского, тайского и лаосского языков, Московский государственный 
институт международных отношений (Университет) МИД России, просп. Вернадского, 76, 119454 
г. Москва, Россия, uryvski@yahoo.com, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0146-1365
