C. / Pp. 126—129 
В О П Р О С Ы  Я З Ы К О З Н А Н И Я  
2018. № 1
 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija
R. Hickey (ed.). The Cambridge handbook of areal linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2017. 1032 p. ISBN 9781107051614*.
Dmitry Nikolaev
Russian State University for the Humanities, Mos-
cow, Russia; Russian Presidential Academy of Na-
tional Economy and Public Administration, Moscow, 
Russia; The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jeru-
salem, Israel; dsnikolaev@gmail.com
Дмитрий Сергеевич Николаев
Российский государственный гуманитарный уни-
верситет, Москва, Россия; Российская академия на-
родного хозяйства и государственной службы, Мо-
сква, Россия; Иерусалимский еврейский универси-
тет, Иерусалим, Израиль; dsnikolaev@gmail.com
The aim of ‘The Cambridge handbook of areal linguistics’ edited by Raymond Hickey is to pro-
vide a ‘focused and clearly structured volume’ on areal linguistics, which is understood by the 
editor of the book as ‘research into how languages come to share features diachronically and the 
manner in which this takes place’ (p. 1). Areal linguistics is therefore a multidisciplinary research 
enterprise situated at the intersection of different subﬁelds of linguistics ‘such as language contact, 
typology and historical linguistics’. In other words, areal linguistics is interested in non-trivial 
spatial constellations of linguistic features that arise historically due to language contact.
The volume consists of a preface that brieﬂy outlines the main research questions and describes 
the contents of individual contributions, followed by two parts that constitute the bulk of the book: 
‘Issues in areal linguistics’ and ‘Case studies for areal linguistics’.
The ﬁrst part begins with an essay ‘Why is it so hard to deﬁne a linguistic area?’ by Lyle Camp-
bell. It mostly reiterates the statement made in the scholar’s authoritative paper [Campbell 2006] 
that it is fruitless ‘to struggle over the intractability of deﬁning the concept “linguistic area” and 
the speciﬁc “linguistic areas”’ and that researchers should focus on ‘understanding the changes 
themselves, in particular in this instance the changes diffused across languages’ instead (p. 34). 
This research programme is in stark contrast to that proposed by Balthasar Bickel in the short 
chapter entitled ‘Areas and universals’. Bickel notes in passing that humans are good at spotting 
spatial patterns, which provides an intuitive explanation for the enduring interest in linguistic ar-
eas, but his main concern is with carefully controlling for distributions of linguistic features in ty-
pologists’ quest for universal tendencies, not with particular historical scenarios.1 Instead of trying 
to account for diffusion of individual changes (which is in most cases simply impossible), Bickel 
takes the existence of linguistic areas for granted and urges researchers to come up with ways 
to control for possible phylogenetic and areal biases; he discusses two methods — Predictive Ar-
eality Theory and the Family Bias Method — that were developed precisely with this aim in mind.
The next chapter, ‘Reassessing sprachbunds: A view from the Balkans’ by Victor A. Friedman 
and Brian D. Joseph, can also be construed as a response to linguistic-area sceptics, in this case 
based on the long history of research on the Balkans, the ‘prototypical sprachbund’. To tackle 
the sprachbund issue, the scholars propose a questionnaire on the properties of a particular lin-
guistic region that must be completed in order to decide whether the region should be considered 
a bona ﬁde linguistic area. The questions concern the number of different languages and language 
families represented in the region, the number and distributional properties of the features used 
to establish the sprachbund, the causal issues (contact vs. inheritance), the issues of delineation 
(i. e. how to draw borders, core vs. periphery), and ﬁnally the issue of whether the convergence 
 * This paper was ﬁnancially supported by the Russian Science Foundation (RSF), grant № 14-18-00590-П 
 “Texts and practices of folklore as a model of cultural tradition: А comparative-typological study”.
 
1 He references work by Dryer [1989] and Nichols [1992], who drew the attention of typologists to large-
scale areal patterns.
 
Dmitry Nikolaev 
127
processes that resulted in the formation of the sprachbund are still ongoing. By answering these 
questions with regard to the Balkan sprachbund, Friedman and Joseph essentially propose yet 
another linguistic-area delineation framework and eventually come to the conclusion that (i) lin-
guistic areas do exist as theoretically meaningful, well-deﬁned entities, which reﬂect ‘the effects 
of intense multilateral, multidirectional, mutual multilingualism’ (p. 80), and that (ii) the Balkans 
are an example of such an entity.
The chapter ‘Areal sound patterns: From perceptual magnets to stone soup’ by Juliette Blevins 
proposes and elaborates the notion of areal sound pattern (ASP), deﬁned brieﬂy as a ‘sound 
pattern shared minimally by two languages, having arguably diffused from one into the other’ 
(p. 89; a more elaborate deﬁnition is given on p. 88). Blevins gives several examples of ASPs: 
pre-glottalisation of voiced stops in Formosan languages, the absence of contrastive retroﬂex-
ion in two regions in Australia, the presence of glottalised consonants in the Paciﬁc Northwest 
of North America, and devoicing of ﬁnal obstruents in Europe. She then proceeds to propose 
a general historical scenario which could account for the emergence of ASPs that are not entirely 
due to loan phonology. According to Blevins, ASPs arise due to what she calls the perceptual 
magnet effect: in situations of bilingualism, ‘the phonetic prototype established for one language 
may have a magnet effect in another’ (p. 99). The perceptual magnet effect skews the distribution 
of allophones in the pool of synchronic variation already existing in the target language and thus 
pulls it towards a certain developmental trajectory, which is still always possible, but much less 
probable without this inﬂuence. Blevins discusses properties of sound patterns and contact situa-
tions, which are more or less likely to lead to areal spread, and discusses several other examples 
of possible ASPs (e. g. clicks in South Africa, ejectives in the Caucasus, retroﬂexion in South Asia, 
and tone in Southeast Asia) and their historical background.
The chapter ‘Convergence and divergence in the phonology of the languages of Europe’ 
by Thomas Stolz and Nataliya Levkovych gives a descriptive statistical overview of consonantal 
inventories in European languages (Europe in this chapter is meant to include the westernmost 
parts of Kazakhstan, as well as Transcaucasia and Anatolia). The scholars provide tables and 
maps depicting the distributions of different airstream mechanisms, manners and places of ar-
ticulation, phonation types, secondary articulations, and particular segments in the languages 
of Europe. Additionally, they provide data on phylum-internal diversity along these lines. Based 
on the collected data, Stolz and Levkovych conclude that (i) Caucasian languages are clearly dif-
ferent from other languages of the region, as are, to a lesser extent, the Eskimo-Aleut languages 
of Greenland, and that (ii) ‘minority conﬁgurations tend to occur in languages that are remote 
from the centre of the European continent’ (p. 154). They also note the presence of an east-west 
cline in the distribution of phonological features, which is evident even if the Caucasian data 
are not taken into account.
The chapter ‘Word prominence and areal linguistics’ by Harry van der Hulst, Rob Goedemans, 
and Keren Rice surveys areal effects in the distribution of stress and pitch-accent types in the 
languages of the world with a focus on hybrid stress-pitch-accent systems. Basque, languages 
of North America, and aboriginal languages of Australia are presented as case studies.
A similar overview of areal phenomena in the distribution of a particular fragment of linguistic 
system is presented by Maria Koptjevskaja-Tamm and Henrik Liljegren in the chapter ‘Semantic 
patterns from an areal perspective’. For the ﬁrst time, they survey areal clusters of lexico-seman-
tic parallels (calques), shared formulaic expressions, and patterns of organisation of semantic do-
mains in different regions and then exemplify these phenomena with a case study of the Greater 
Hindu Kush linguistic area.
The second part of the handbook consists of case studies of several kinds, and instead of sur-
veying them sequentially, I group them thematically in this review.
The ﬁrst group consists of chapters dealing with particular linguistic areas. These chapters are 
‘The Caucasus’ (Sven Grawunder), ‘Western Asia: East Anatolia as a transition zone’ (Geoffrey 
Haig), ‘The Kalahari Basin area as a “sprachbund” before the Bantu expansion’ (Tom Güldemann 
and Anne-Maria Fehn), ‘Jharkhand as a “linguistic area”: Language contact between Indo-Aryan 
128 
Voprosy Jazykoznanija 
2018. № 1
and Munda in Eastern-Central South Asia’ (John Peterson), ‘Sri Lanka and South India’ (Um-
berto Ansaldo), ‘Language in the Mainland Southeast Asia’ (N. J. Enﬁeld), ‘Languages of East-
ern Melanesia’ (Paul Geraghty), and ‘The Western Micronesian Sprachbund’ (Anthony P. Grant).
These chapters demonstrate a high degree of variation in the proposed criteria for establishing 
linguistic areas, the features that can be selected to prove their existence, and their resulting geo-
graphical structure. Some areas, such as Sri Lanka, are clearly delineated and are based on deep 
grammatical similarities decisively separating languages of the area from their relatives in other 
regions. Other areas are more tentative in that they have fuzzy boundaries and/or show overlap-
ping but not coextensive distributions of diagnostic features (cf. the maps in the chapters on the 
Caucasus and Jharkhand), which may not be numerous or deeply entrenched. Insofar as these 
chapters represent the general outlook of research on linguistic areas, they depict a ﬁeld more an-
chored to common sense and explanatory clarity than to strict application of ﬁrst principles of sta-
tistical analysis (which are conspicuously absent from these contributions).
The chapters from the second group are dedicated to areal processes that shape the structure 
of languages from a particular linguistic family or other phylogenetic unit. These chapters are ‘The 
Germanic languages and areal linguistics’ (Johan van der Auwera and Daniël Van Olmen), ‘Va-
rieties of English’ (Bernd Kortmann and Verena Schröter), ‘Slavic languages’ (Alan Timberlake), 
‘Areal contact in Nilo-Saharan’ (Gerrit J. Dimmendaal), ‘Niger-Congo languages’ (Jeff Good), 
and ‘The Transeurasian languages’ (Martine Robbeets). The last chapter is markedly different 
from the rest. It starts out from the communis opinio that the similarities between Transeurasian 
languages (also known as Altaic languages) are due to prolonged contact but concludes with the 
thesis that the distribution and structure of these commonalities most probably point to common 
inheritance. Therefore, in Robbeets’ view, Altaic languages do form a phylogenetic unit after all. 
Other chapters are mostly devoted to enumerating cases of contact-induced feature distributions 
in the languages from a given linguistic grouping.
The third group of chapters is dedicated to describing particular regions, whose languages dis-
play contact-induced distributions of features but do not necessarily form a sprachbund. It consists 
of the following contributions: ‘Britain and Ireland’ (Raymond Hickey), ‘An areal view of Africa’ 
(Bernd Heine and Anne-Maria Fehn), ‘South Africa and areal linguistics’ (Rajend Mesthrie), ‘Lan-
guages of China in their East and Southeast Asian context’ (Hilary Chappell), ‘Languages of Aus-
tralia’ (Luisa Miceli and Alan Dench), ‘Languages of the New Guinea region’ (Malcolm Ross), 
‘Native North American languages’ (Marianne Mithun), and ‘The areal linguistics of Amazonia’ 
(Patience Epps and Lev Michael). They deal mostly with smaller sprachbunds that can be identi-
ﬁed inside these macro-areas and/or try to elucidate contact scenarios that gave rise to particular, 
presumably non-inherited, linguistic features in certain languages.
Taken together, the chapters from the last two groups provide a wealth of information about 
different historical scenarios, showing how hard it is to come up with a uniﬁed theory of linguis-
tic convergence. For example, languages of North and South America display non-trivially low 
amounts of lexical borrowing, which accords well with linguistic attitudes of their speakers, who 
prefer using ‘pure’ varieties to code-switching. African multilingual communities surveyed by Jeff 
Good, on the other hand, are particularly prone to creating mixed varieties, which serve as iden-
tity markers for certain social groups.
Two chapters try to estimate the possibility of postulating a sprachbund based on a particular 
complex feature, such as case marking (‘The changing proﬁle of case marking in the Northeastern 
Siberia area’ by Gregory D. S. Anderson, who gives a positive answer) or the presence and char-
acteristics of tone (‘Southeast Asian tone in areal perspective’ by James Kirby and Marc Brunelle, 
who give a negative answer, not fully disqualifying SEA as a potential sprachbund nonetheless).
The volume closes with a standalone chapter ‘Linguistic areas, linguistic convergence and river 
systems in South America’ by Rik van Gijn, Harald Hammarström, Simon van de Kerke, Olga 
Krasnoukhova, and Pieter Muysken, who try to estimate the role of river systems in the formation 
of linguistic areas in South America by means of careful geographical sampling and signiﬁcance 
testing. They come to the conclusion that this role is negligible.
 
Dmitry Nikolaev 
129
As a whole, the volume under review provides a quite comprehensive introduction to the ﬁeld 
of linguistic areal studies and presents different current positions taken by specialists in this ﬁeld. 
Some chapters (such as that by Juliette Blevins) provide important theoretical or methodological 
reference points; others (such as the one by Malcolm Ross) are both methodologically sound and 
replete with carefully systematised and laid out information — in one way or another, all macro-
regions of the world are covered. At the same time, however, there are several presentational 
drawbacks, which impede perusal of the volume as a handbook.
First, it would probably have beneﬁted from a bit more structured presentation. Chapters in the 
second part are organised in neither a geographical, nor a thematic sequence: chapters on Africa 
are sandwiched between Western and Eastern Eurasia, and chapters on areas are interspersed with 
chapters on regions, families, or particular linguistic features in no particular order. Moreover, the 
chapters on the Balkans and on European phonologies from the ﬁrst part, even though they con-
tain some theoretical discussion, have a clear geographical focus.
Second, chapters could have been more coherent in their presentation of data. Even though 
vastly different features are adduced to postulate different sprachbunds, they all fall in the same 
general categories of phonology, morphosyntax, discourse, and lexicon. A common presentational 
sequence would have greatly facilitated comparison of different cases.
Third, some statements made in different chapters probably need clariﬁcation and additional 
cross-referencing. Thus, Alan Timberlake’s reference to ‘modern understanding of linguistic ar-
eas as a force with less immediate and less visible contact than ordinary contact’ (p. 350) is rather 
opaque and seems to be in contradiction with assumptions held by other contributors.
Finally, and most importantly, a handbook of areal linguistics certainly needs a dedicated chap-
ter on statistical methods. Strangely enough, several chapters refer to the contribution by Kirby 
and Brunelle on the areal value of tone in SEA as the discussion of statistical methods, but it is 
nothing of the kind. Several statistical techniques such as Predictive Areality Theory or Bayes-
ian non-parametric areal linguistics are mentioned in separate chapters but are never discussed 
in depth. Some interesting papers on statistical delineation of linguistic areas, such as [Donohue, 
Whiting 2011], are not mentioned at all. As a result, at least one promising way of providing a solid 
basis for the study of linguistic areas remains largely unexplored except for the valuable negative 
result reported in the last chapter, which also contains some useful references.
These drawbacks, however, are of relatively minor importance and cannot obscure the fact 
that ‘The Cambridge handbook of areal linguistics’ is a valuable contribution to the study of lin-
guistic areas, which will hopefully provide a starting point for the development of the ﬁeld in the 
near future.
