© Санкт-Петербургский государственный университет, 2020
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu09.2020.211 
343
UDC 81”26
Ekaterina V. Nagornova
Institute оf Fоreign Languages of Рeoples’ Friendship University of Russia, 
6, Miklukho-Maklaya ul., Moscow, 117198, Russia 
nagornova_ev@rudn.university
Yana A. Volkova
Institute оf Fоreign Languages of Рeoples’ Friendship University of Russia, 
6, Miklukho-Maklaya ul., Moscow, 117198, Russia 
volkova_yaa@rudn.university
The concept HOUSE in Penelope Lively’s The House 
in Norham Gardens*
For citation: Nagornova E. V., Volkova Ya. A. The concept HOUSE in Penelope Lively’s The House in 
Norham Gardens. Vestnik of Saint Petersburg University. Language and Literature. 2020, 17 (2): 343–
364. https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu09.2020.211 (In Russian)
In this paper, the verbalization of one of the key concepts in the English sphere of con-
cepts, HOUSE, in P. Lively’s novel The House in Norham Gardens is analysed. The research is 
based on a three-layer model of a concept developed by V. I. Karasik, as well as the method 
of linguo-conceptual analysis which involves the following steps: 1) definition and etymo-
logical analysis of the lexeme house; 2) analysis of the lexical and phraseological units rep-
resenting the concept in the language, 3) contextual analysis of the corpus of contexts in 
which the lexeme house is used. The traditional, “cultural”, verbalization of the HOUSE is 
compared with the author’s individual one, which is derived through a similar analysis of 
the author’s contexts. In the novel, a certain extension in the meaning of the core compo-
nents is traced — the concept HOUSE acquires the basic features of the concept HOME. The 
method of linguo-conceptual analysis allows us to reveal the variety of images connected 
with the idea of the house. The metaphorical models “the house is a museum”, “the house is 
life”, “the house is a dinosaur/monster” employed by the author add to the conceptualization 
of the house as a major value of English culture. This concept is based on the archaic under-
standing of the house as “one’s own”, internal, mastered space, which confronts the strange, 
external space of chaos. The analysis allows us to assume that the procedure of the linguo-
conceptual analysis of the individual author’s concepts opens up prospects for further study 
of the individual author’s concepts in modern English literature, followed by a comparative 
study in the intercultural dimension.
Keywords: author’s worldview, cognitive linguistics, concept HOUSE, cultural concept, Pe-
nelope Lively.
Introduction
This study is a part of a project investigating the core values of English culture re-
flected in modern English literature.
* The publication is supported by “RUDN University Program 5-100”.
344 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
 “House” can be regarded as a fundamental value of many world cultures, and English 
seems to be no exception [Easthope 2004; Parsell 2012; Saunders 1989, et al.]. English 
grand country houses have always attracted fiction authors of all epochs, from J. Austen 
to modern writers. The American novelist Henry James paid tribute to the importance of 
this concept in the English mentality with the following words:
Of all the great things that the English have invented and made part of the credit of the 
national character, the most perfect, the most characteristic, the only one they have mastered 
completely in all its details, so that it becomes a compendious illustration of their social 
genius and their manners, is the well-appointed, well-administered, well-filled country 
house [James 1905: 292].
Modern novelists are drawn to the concept of the English stately house, and P. Lively 
is a good example. In The House in Norham Gardens1 (1974), the concept HOUSE plays a 
central role; it is carefully thought through and verbalized, eventually becoming a major 
character. The lexeme house is placed in a strong position — in the title of the novel. From 
the very beginning, the readers realize that all events, actions, relationships are connected 
with the house. It correlates with all the other topics and notions represented in the novel: 
history, memory, time, family, multicultural society, continuity of generations, and oth-
ers. Thus, in the novel, we can see a large old house on a quiet road in an ancient city. The 
house is filled with relics from the past, trophies from expeditions to the Stone Age of New 
Guinea. Clare, the fourteen-year-old protagonist, lives with her two great-aunts in this 
three-story spacious Victorian house. The house has been in the family for many years. 
Like the castle in Dodie Smith’s novel I Capture the Castle (1948), it is altogether too big 
for its occupants. With its breakfast rooms and flower rooms, it is impractical: a relic, 
stuffed with old letters, and photographs, and the fruits of colonial expeditions made by 
Clare’s great-grandfather. At fourteen, Clare is responsible for her great-aunts’ health and 
the finances of the house, and despite her contentment with all the history and the eccen-
tricity, the atmosphere of doom hangs over it all, unspoken and perhaps unacknowledged. 
Everything is poised, hushed, almost breathless, between several kinds of time, several dif-
ferent worlds. There are many other types of houses and homes which are described or just 
mentioned by the author. They complete the perfect setting for the book. Houses create a 
special atmosphere of a place, reveal the characters of people living in them, become parts 
of a family histories, country history, and national culture. All these explain our interest in 
the concept HOUSE in Lively’s novel, thus making the book the subject of research.
Also, it is necessary to speak about Lively’s creative work in general. Since the publica-
tion of her first novel in 1970 (a children’s book entitled Astercote), Lively has developed 
into a writer who is both prolific and wide-ranging. She is the author of over forty novels, 
short story collections, young adult fiction, and children’s fiction. Lively’s work appeals 
to both a youthful, popular audience keen on finding escape within a good yarn, and to 
an academic audience interested in her experimental narrative techniques and her crea-
tion of what postmodern scholars sometimes refer to as “historiographical metafiction”. 
Lively’s slight attention to the traditional means of creating characters does not mean that 
she completely abandons this category. The writer uses other, often indirect means to cre-
ate her characters’ images, their inner life. Lively’s novels reflect many aspects of the image 
1 Lively P. The house in Norham Gardens. Cit. ex: [Lively 1974]. (Henceforth — The House.) 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2 
345
and lifestyle of the English. Her experimental narrative techniques make it possible to 
explore the characters’ inner speech, which, unlike the external one, is less dependent on 
the communicative situation, social roles, and conventions, and allows for observing the 
linguistic personality in its immediate manifestation.
Lively is especially concerned with the relationship between the past and memory, a 
concern that can be traced back to her years as an undergraduate when she read modern 
history. Speaking on the subject of memory, Lively says she is interested in “the ways in 
which the physical world is composed of memory, the way in which it’s an encumbrance 
and the ways in which is an asset… I can hardly decide which it is. But it is something that 
I’m constantly aware of and constantly seeking new ways of exploring fictionally”2.
The study of the concept HOUSE in its implementation in the novel The House in 
Norham Gardens makes it possible to identify the features of the concept HOUSE in Eng-
lish linguistic culture through the author’s individual worldview.
The study utilizes both cognitive [Kubryakova 1999; Popova, Sternin 2003; Barsalou 
2017; Pelletier 2017; Compositionality 2017] and linguo-cultural [Smolicz 1981; Vorobyev 
1997; Karasik, Slyshkin 2001; Vorkachev 2004; Mendez 2011] approaches to the study 
of cultural concepts. The linguistic representation of the concept HOUSE is analyzed in 
Lively’s The House in Norham Gardens (1974). Particular attention is paid to the writer’s 
worldview, which is non-accidental, since individualized speech is more responsive to 
changes in both linguistic and socio-cultural environments. Furthermore, the study of 
cultural concepts through the artistic text provides a basis for a comparative analysis of the 
universal and individual components of a cultural concept.
Theoretical framework and research methodology
The term “concept” as it is used in this article is widely applied in modern linguistics 
to a range of cognitive, cultural, and literary data. Generally, it is understood as a complex 
mental formation which refers to the cognitive, spiritual or material spheres of human life, 
but becomes accessible through language. Thus, the cognitive and linguistic sides of the 
concept are closely intertwined. This idea, in fact, stems from Wilhelm von Humboldt’s 
observation that 
language and thinking are inextricably linked. Each person has a subjective image of an ob-
ject that does not completely coincide with the image of the same object another person has, 
and this view can be objectified only by making its way through the mouth to the outside 
world3 [Humboldt 2000: 168].
Much later, when the interrelation between language and culture was no longer called 
into question, G. Lakoff and M. Johnson observed that “language is a powerful social tool 
that coordinates the human flow into an ethnos that forms a nation through the pres-
ervation and transmission of culture, traditions, and public consciousness of the given 
language community”. [Lakoff, Johnson 1980: 180–181]. Russian linguist Yu. S. Stepanov 
introduced the idea of “a cultural concept”, which has a double-sided nature: on the one 
hand, it is “a cultural unit in the mental world of a human being”, on the other hand, it is 
2 Penelope Lively. https://literature.britishcouncil.org/writer/penelope-lively (accessed: 21.04.2018).
3 The translation of all Russian sources which are quoted in the article was done by the authors of the 
article.
346 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
represented, or materialized, only through language [Stepanov 2001: 288–306]. According 
to the scholar, cultural concepts are represented by lexical units, idiomatic expressions, 
and/or texts. Since then, numerous attempts to create a consistent and coherent “con-
ceptual” picture of the world have been undertaken, including a series of studies in lin-
guo-cultural concepts [Anthology 2007; Karasik 2002; 2015; Goddard, Wierzbicka 2014; 
Underhill 2012; Vorkachev 2016; Wierzbicka 2011; 2016; 2017a; 2017b] and wide-scale 
research on emotion concepts [Kövecses 1990; 2006; Emotions 2001]. Each of these stud-
ies touches upon the correlation between the universal and cultural components in the 
concept, which allows us to see that though the biological nature of some phenomena is 
the same, each concrete culture chooses its own linguistic way of verbalization. Moreover, 
modern research results indicate that the same or similar concepts are evaluated differ-
ently in different cultures. The results open broad prospects for intercultural comparative 
linguistic study of this cultural-linguistic phenomenon.
What does not seem to have received much attention so far is the way in which the 
universal and cultural components are interrelated with the individual one. Individual 
reflection is creative, and it allows us to speak about an author’s individual worldview. 
As L. G. Babenko notes, “the author’s artistic worldview combines elements of a national 
worldview and individual representations. Each literary work embodies an individual au-
thor’s way of perceiving and organizing the world, i. e. a particular version to conceptual-
ize the world” [Babenko, Kazarin 2004: 58–59]. Thus, concepts in a literary text, on the 
one hand, reflect the traditional, within a particular culture, perception of the reality, and 
on the other hand — add individual, even unique, features. The degree of correspondence 
between the universal/cultural and individual knowledge in the artistic worldview in a lit-
erary text can be different: from complete identity to complete divergence. Though some 
scholars state that concepts of the artistic worldview can hardly be defined and described 
clearly and unconditionally, we believe that it is their verbalization in the literary text that 
allows us to trace the interrelation between the universal and the particular, to define the 
true value of a concept in the culture, which turns a regular lexeme into a cultural concept.
In the article, the concept is defined as a multidimensional mental formation that has 
figurative, conceptual, and value components [Karasik 2002]. The principal provisions are 
as follows: the concept is a unit of consciousness; it is verbalized in various linguistic forms 
and possesses cultural specificity. In general, the concept description involves the study of 
the totality of the language representing it, including the paradigmatic and syntagmatic 
links of the core lexeme, which denotes the concept.
The purpose of this article is to analyze the verbalization of the individual author’s 
concept HOUSE in Lively’s The House in Norham Gardens, to compare the author’s in-
dividual perception with the basic characteristics of HOUSE as an English cultural con-
cept. We share the viewpoint that individual concepts function as a clue to understanding 
cultural specifics of an ethos [Charyikova 2001; Litvinova 2009; Vyistropova 2013]. To 
study the concept HOUSE in Lively’s novel, we applied the three-layer model of a concept 
developed by V. I. Karasik as well as the method of linguo-conceptual analysis which, in 
this research, includes the following steps: 1) definition and etymological analysis of the 
lexeme naming the concept, specifically house; 2) analysis of the lexical and phraseological 
units representing the concept in language; 3) contextual analysis of the corpus of the con-
texts in which the lexeme house is used [Karasik 2002]. Therefore, the first step involves 
a semantic analysis of the core lexeme house in various explanatory dictionaries check-
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2 
347
ing its etymology, which contributes to revealing the value of the concept to the culture. 
At the second stage, we reveal and explore a wide range of language units, paroemia, set 
expressions, and stylistic devices used to speak about the house. They include conceptual 
metaphors as well. As a result, we can see what images are associated with the house in 
English culture, whether the concept HOUSE is valued or not, i. e. its axiological potential. 
After that, the traditional, “cultural” verbalization of the house is compared with the au-
thor’s one, which is derived through a similar analysis of the author’s contexts. The text of 
the novel amounts to 52,864 words. With the continuous sampling method, 450 text frag-
ments containing the lexeme house were selected. They were subjected to a thorough con-
textual and interpretative analysis in order to reveal various semantic and stylistic links 
of the core lexeme house. 97 examples of contexts containing the core lexeme were taken 
from various English dictionaries to provide material for the “cultural” interpretation of 
the concept. Finally, the concept HOUSE in English culture was compared with the con-
cept HOUSE in Lively’s artistic worldview, which revealed both universal and individual 
characteristics and attitudes to the concept under study.
Results and discussions
The concept HOUSE in the English language
This work is based on the three-layer concept structure which includes notional, val-
ue, and figurative components.
Following Karasik [Karasik 2002], S. M. Bogatova [Bogatova 2006] attributes the 
concept HOUSE to semantic doublets. Respectively, we conduct an analysis of the seman-
tics of the lexemes house and home, identify the basic cognitive layers, cognitive features, 
and the differential characteristics of these lexemes. We analyze the dictionary definitions 
of the lexemes house and home4.
The notional component of the concept HOUSE in the English language
The main cognitive layers and characteristics represented by the above-mentioned 
lexemes were identified. Although there are some obvious similarities in the content of 
these conceptual layers, the house and home still have a unique core and a set of cogni-
tive features. The conceptual layer house includes two cognitive layers: (1) a building for 
people to live in, a building for animals or goods: a hen house, a warehouse, a building 
in which children live at a private boarding school, a theatre, concert hall, or auditorium: 
a vaudeville house, the building in which a legislative or official deliberative body meets, 
residence of a religious community; (2) the people living in such a house, the household, 
the important family, especially noble or royal: The House of Windsor is the British royal 
family, the people watching a performance in a theater, concert hall, the audience, the 
members of the law-making body: the House of Commons, the members of a religious 
community. Thus, the external aspect of the structure and the principle of grouping peo-
ple according to the external circumstances are emphasized. The conceptual layer home in 
4 The study analyses in detail the semantics of the lexemes house and home, identifies the basic cogni-
tive layers and cognitive features represented by these lexemes, and also identifies the differential signs and 
points of contact of their conceptual content. The following dictionaries were used in the research: [LDCE 
1995; LDELC 1992; Hornby et al. 1995; OCDE 2002; ODE 2003; ODSA 1999; RHWSOT 1995].
348 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
its core is determined by the cognitive attributes “place”, “uniqueness”, “one’s own/strange”, 
which introduces the category of a subject and relationship into its semantics and serves as 
a basis for delimitating the conceptual layers house and home. The conceptual layer home 
includes the cognitive layers: “the house, flat, etc. where a man lives”, “the place where a 
man was born or habitually lives and to which a man usually has emotional ties”, “the fam-
ily, the place in which one’s domestic affections are centered”. The basis for distinguishing 
between these two conceptual layers is an attribute “one’s own/strange” which permeates 
and unites all the cognitive features of the lexeme home: “permanence of residence”, “emo-
tional attachment”, “comfort”, “family”, “security”, “privacy”, “solitude”, etc. To conclude, 
the conceptual layer house appears in its core as a material object, and home as a spiritual 
object, allocated on the relationship basis. The results obtained through the definition 
analysis are supported by the study of the paradigmatic links of these lexemes (see: [Boga-
tova 2006] for an extensive analysis).
The value component of the concept HOUSE in the English language
The study of the value component confirms the fact that this concept is a key one for 
the English linguistic culture. A house, a home for the English people living in a densely 
populated country is a place where they can relax and be themselves [Girouard 1992]. 
Therefore, the Englishman needs a house-fortress, to hide not so much from the weather 
as from other people’s views. This feature of national character connects this concept with 
another dominant of English culture — privacy [Easthope 2004]. “In general, the English 
house is a micromodel of the island: a blind fence that rails off the outside world, and a 
piece of lovingly cultivated land — small, well-groomed” [Tsvetkova 2001: 168]. In the 
heart of the English notion “home” is the idea of isolation, separation from the rest of the 
world and isolation in its small, comfortably equipped space [Parsell 2012].
The analysis of lexical compatibility, phrase-combinations, and paroemia allows us to 
reveal the concept additional cognitive features. The value layer, represented by the lexeme 
house contains features that, in the English language worldview, are related to the house’s 
exterior aspects, its physical characteristics: exterior, beauty, safety, stability. The value 
layer objectified by the lexeme home reflects some other aspects of the English house such 
as the psychological atmosphere; internal security; the tenants’ social status and includes 
additional cognitive features: an individual’s inner world, consciousness; limit, edge; sense 
and mental health. It is obvious that in the English language the value layer “home” is the 
cultural dominant [Saunders 1989]. It reflects the connotations of emotional attachment, 
Lares and Penates, house-fortress.
Many aspects for interpreting the space have a mythological basis, which necessitates 
separating the mythological layer of the concept HOUSE in the language.
The house in the archaic consciousness is associated with the internal, mastered 
space, which confronts the strange, external space of chaos. The house symbolizes secu-
rity, permanence, shelter, stronghold, dwelling, corner; family, family nest, clan, dynasty; 
fatherland; human body. The mythopoeic motives of building a house are connected with 
developing and cultivating a new space [Lotman 2000].
The archaic consciousness perceives the destruction of the house as a reference point 
in the surrounding world. In the mythopoeic consciousness, the motive for the destruc-
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2 
349
tion of a house is associated with the abolition of habitual sense-distinguishing landmarks; 
as a result, a person finds himself/herself in the space of absolute non-being.
The figurative component of the concept HOUSE in the English language
The conceptual ideas in this study belong to Lakoff. He examines different concepts, 
provides examples, and analyses the concepts HOUSE and HOME [Lakoff, Johnson 1980]. 
In Women, fire, and dangerous things [Lakoff 1987: 538–540] and Metaphors We Live By, 
Lakoff and Johnson state that the human conceptual system is metaphorically structured 
and defined. According to them, the conceptual metaphor is a system of metaphors that 
lies behind much of everyday language and forms everyday conceptual systems, includ-
ing the most abstract concepts. A metaphor is “understanding and experiencing one kind 
of thing in terms of another” [Lakoff, Johnson 1980: 5]. Lakoff’s theory of the cognitive 
metaphor reveals the relationship between metaphors: “A metaphor can be viewed as an 
experientially based mapping from an ICM (an idealized cognitive model) in one domain 
to an ICM in another domain” [Lakoff 1987: 411] which makes it possible to describe the 
metaphorical meanings of the concept HOUSE. 
The concept HOUSE in Penelope Lively’s House in Norham Gardens
The study of the concept HOUSE in its implementation in the novel The House in 
Norham Gardens makes it possible to identify the concept HOUSE as an English cultural 
concept.
The notional component of the concept
An analysis of the novel’s text allows us to make an assumption about the individual 
author’s worldview, which is in some way different from the worldview represented in the 
national trivial consciousness. The layer “home” is inferior to the layer “house”. The lexeme 
home is found in the novel 45 times, house 142. A lower degree of relevance of the layer 
“home” for expressing the author’s view is seen. This fact could be explained, first of all, by 
the important function of the house in the book, since, as we mentioned previously, it is 
one of the major characters. Also, it is a setting for the plot. It is the element which helps 
outline and understand other protagonists of the book as well.
The analysis of the substantial use of the lexeme home in the novel makes it possible to 
trace the realization of the basic cognitive features of this layer in the author’s worldview, 
which are also revealed in the national language worldview.
In the following examples, in the layer “home”, the cognitive attribute “one’s own 
/ strange” is portrayed. It is explicable by the possessive pronouns (your, my):
(1) Not so funny. In my home we have ceremonial spears and my father’s tribal dress, 
though he does not wear it any more.
‘It’s funny for North Oxford,’ said Clare. ‘Where’s your home?’
‘Uganda. A little village one hundred miles from Kampala. John Sempebwa’. He held 
out his hand (The House. P. 61).
350 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
In this example, the cognitive feature “motherland” is foregrounded by indicating the 
character’s nationality and a presupposition that he is in a foreign country, and home refers 
to his homeland. There is another example of this lexeme in the text: (2) “Where’s that 
when it’s at home? No, do not tell me — it’s near Australia”. (The House. P. 28).
The cognitive feature “family” is foregrounded when the lexeme home is realized in its 
basic meanings “a place of residence”, “a place of birth”:
(3) She went into the museum with a feeling of coming home. It was a place she had 
always liked (The House. P. 59);
(4) She went through the doors at the far end, down the steps, and into the Pitt Rivers 
Museum, where the feeling of coming home was stronger still (The House. P. 59);
(5) She thought of John, leaving home for three years (The House. P. 110).
In each illustrative example, home symbolizes in the character’s mind not so much 
the image of the house itself, but the family living in it, the special atmosphere of warmth 
and mutual understanding, and traditions and customs inherent in it. Therefore, it can be 
concluded that the feature “emotional attachment” in Lively’s worldview is closely related 
to the feature “family”. At the same time, the cognitive feature “comfort” in the content of 
the layer “home” is not vividly explicated and expressed by other means. Here are some 
other examples:
(6) She took him into the kitchen. ‘Sorry about the mess’.
‘Not at all,’ said John. ‘It is homely’. He pulled a chair out of the table and sat down 
(The House. P. 83);
(7) Home, she toured the house, as though she had been away for a long time and needed 
to make sure that everything was all right and in its proper place (The House. P. 142).
Along with a few substantive implementations, in most cases, the lexeme home func-
tions in the novel as a component of the collocation at home. The most frequent is the 
meaning “the place where a man lives” and “the place of birth, origin”, for example:
(8) Mrs. Cramp asked if she was feeling better, and hoped she had rested at home yesterday.
‘Yes,’ said Clare, ‘I rested at home yesterday, and I am quite all right now.’ (The House. 
P. 108);
(9) ‘We have those at home,’ said John, pointing. A bright, patterned snake lay against the 
glass, basking in the sun of a sixty-watt bulb (The House. P. 112).
Thus, the layer “home” in the novel represents the following cognitive layers included 
in the national concept: “the place of living”, “the place of birth / motherland”, and “fam-
ily”. This conceptual layer contains the same basic cognitive features of the corresponding 
layer in the national language image: “one’s own / strange”, “emotional attachment”, and 
“family”.
The conceptual layer “house” implemented in the novel includes the following cogni-
tive layers of a nationwide concept: “a building;” “a place of living”, “residence”, “family”, 
and “dynasty”.
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2 
351
The first layer — “house as a building” does not serve to foreground the functional 
features of the house as a place of living or a shelter. The cognitive feature which is fore-
grounded is house — “a physical object” that is the house is perceived as an object oc-
cupying room in space and possessing some physical characteristics (the indication of 
belonging is absent):
(10) Belbroughton Road. Linton Road. Bardwell Road. The houses there are quite 
normal. They are ordinary sizes and have ordinary chimneys and roofs and gardens 
with laburnum and flowering cherry… They are three stories high… neatly 
grouped in threes with flaring brick to set them off… They have nineteen rooms and 
half a dozen chimneys and iron fire escapes (The House. P. 1);
(11) It was a very grey dusk, quite colourless, like a photograph — white snow and grey 
houses and blue-grey sky and black trees. Here and there an uncurtained window 
made of an orange square within the dark and solid outline of the houses (The 
House. P. 24).
In these examples, the word house is used as a “building”, usually when describing the 
cityscape, so the spatial and physical characteristics are the defining ones. This cognitive 
layer is used by the author to create the context of a wider life environment for the charac-
ters. The lexeme house is used here to create a general image of the city and the epoch. In a 
spatial sense, house is included in the relationship “house — streets — Oxford”.
The attributes that describe the lexeme house in the novel serve not for the immediate 
characterization of the protagonists, but for modeling the artistic space of the novel as a 
whole:
(12) Outside, snow fell on North Oxford: on the Parks and the river and the old, dark laurel 
in the gardens and the brick and iron of the big houses (The House. P. 15);
(13) Believe it or not, the fronts of the late-Victorian gothic houses have fewer than 
twenty-one windows, counting each panel of the attic ones as a single window (The 
House. P. 18).
The second cognitive layer coincides with the first dictionary meaning of the lexeme 
house — ‘a place of living (building), residence.’ Insomuch as this cognitive layer of the 
concept represents the external features of the object, the use of the lexeme house in this 
meaning is usually associated with an indication of certain physical characteristics of the 
house, it includes elements of its external and internal description. In Lively’s novel, the 
description of the house fulfills the characterizing function: (14) “Gosh. You are lucky. 
Living in weird house like this. Ours is the same as the next door and the others”. (The 
House. P. 30).
The following example indicates the fact that the house as a place of living is a char-
acteristic attribute of the protagonist’s life:
(15) ‘Actually,’ said Clare, ‘it isn’t dull at all. I like this house being cold and dusty and 
peculiar and I think the aunts are the most interesting people I’ve ever known. If 
they are out of touch, like you said, then I think I’d rather be too, if being in touch 
352 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
is what I think it is. I’ve always liked living with them and I wouldn’t like to live 
anywhere else.’ (The House. P. 75).
In another example, the description of the character’s house is the basis for emphasiz-
ing the heroine’s inner state: (16) “Later, lying in bed, with the house, the huge and si-
lent around her, everyone stowed away into separate rooms, the aunts, Maureen, cousin 
Margaret having a bath, with sounds of distant splashing, she opened the diary and be-
gan to read”. (The House. P. 76).
The evaluation is expressed by the attributes huge and silent. Even though the evalu-
ation is of an indirect nature, since it refers to the characteristics of the house, this assess-
ment is transferred to Clare and it emphasizes the girl’s loneliness. This cognitive layer is 
the basis for modeling the characters’ space.
The next layer of the concept HOUSE — “family”, “dynasty” fulfills the cognitive fea-
ture “a group of people connected by hereditary relations with a certain house / estate”. 
This meaning is widely represented in the novel, which can illustrate its importance in the 
author’s model of the world. In this sense, the lexeme house refers to a noble family:
(17) By the time you get to Norham Gardens they have tottered over the edge into madness: 
these are not houses but flights of fancy. They are three stories high and disguise 
themselves as churches. They have ecclesiastical porches instead of front doors and 
rounds of norman windows or pointed gothic ones, neatly grouped in threes with 
flaring brick to set them off. They are reek of hymns and the Empire, Mafeking and 
the Khyber Pass, Mr. Gladstone and Our Dear Queen… A bomb could not blow 
them up, and the privet in their gardens has survived two World Wars. People live 
in these houses. Clare Mayfield, aged fourteen, raised by aunts in North Oxford (The 
House. P. 1).
It is possible to paraphrase: Clare Mayfield belonged to one of the noble families, 
those which have a long history and rich traditions. The reference to belonging to a noble 
dynasty is given by the characters to emphasize their social statuses as well. Belonging to 
the tradition has a special value in English linguistic culture, which is expressed by the 
substance of the names of the rooms in the house:
(18) They were always in the library at half-past four. They migrated slowly through the 
house during the day: from their bedrooms to the breakfast room to the study to the 
dining-room. I am the only person I know, Clare thought, who has a special room for 
having breakfast in. And a pantry and a flower-room and a silver cupboard and a 
scullery and three lavatories (The House. P. 2).
The value component of the concept
Let us turn to the value component of the concept HOUSE in the novel.
First, we consider the implementation of the conceptual layer “home”. The analysis 
of the predicates, combined with the lexeme home in Lively’s text, allows us to reveal the 
features of conceptualization of this concept [Langacker 2010]. Home mainly functions in 
the text as an adverb in combination with verbs of directional movement, for example: go 
home, come/coming home, leave home, and cycle home.
(19) She went into the museum with a feeling of coming home (The House. P. 59);
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2 
353
(20) Maureen had a phone call from Weybridge, to say that her father was ill. She took a 
couple of days off and went home to see him (The House. P. 127);
(21) She could go home in a day or two, when the doctor had seen her again (The House. 
P. 140).
Thus, home is perceived not so much as a place of living (the place where some events 
occur). It is a place of attraction, the center of family and personal life that a person leaves, 
and where he constantly returns (compare the archetypal notions about the house as the 
world center).
The conceptual layer “home” in the novel differs significantly from the ideas em-
bodied in the general language worldview. It differs, first, in the frequency of objecti-
fication, and in the variable value. For an average Englishman, the notion “home” is 
one of the main cultural dominants and is endowed with considerable value. In the 
novel, Penelope Lively pays more attention to the embodiment of the conceptual layer 
“house”, and “home” appears only as the birthplace and/or residence of the person and 
the family; the place to which he/she is emotionally attached and where the person feels 
comfortable.
A feature of the novel is its detailed development of the conceptual layer “house” ver-
sus the less relevant conceptual background layer “home”. In the writer’s worldview, the 
layer “house” which designates the external spatial characteristics of the structure, along 
with the person’s physical orientation, represents a person’s social and psychological posi-
tion in relation to culture and tradition. It is very important for the novel’s plot.
Thus, the house as someone’s residence, the place of living is itself a sign, a source of 
information about the past and the present for the novel. Accordingly, two additional cog-
nitive layers of the author’s concept represented by the lexeme house can be distinguished 
in the novel: the house as a measure of success in life and the house as an artistic space of 
the protagonist’s life.
The cognitive layer “house as a measure of success in life” in addition to the cognitive 
feature “success” also portrays the feature of “social status”. The house is one of the fea-
tures of social success, self-realization in life for the Englishman. The very fact of owning 
a house is an indicator of a person’s social status and, therefore, a value in itself [Nordby 
2008]. So, the feature of high social status, actualized in the novel, is the possession of a 
house in Oxford — the cradle of education and science. Norham Gardens was developed 
from 1860 onwards as part of the Norham Manor housing estate. Most of its houses are 
large Victorian Gothic villas designed by famous architects. It is a well-known fact that the 
Sanskrit scholar, Max Müller lived at No. 7 from 1848 until his death in 1900. When he 
was Regius Professor of Medicine (1905–1919), Sir William Osler lived at No. 13 with his 
wife, Grace, who remained there until her death in 1928. A number of houses in Norham 
Gardens are now used by the University of Oxford (mainly the Department of Education) 
and its colleges; one of the houses is an ecumenical postgraduate student hostel run by the 
Society of the Sacred Heart.
Thus, the quality of the house indication shows the home owners’ social status — a 
house with nineteen rooms:
(22) The house squatted around them, vast, empty, unnecessary and indestructible. You 
had to be a vast busy Victorian family to expand enough to fill up bases and passages 
and conservatories and attics. You had to have an army of booties and nurses 
354 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
and parlourmaids. You had to have a complicated, greedy system of living that 
used a lot of space and people just in the daily business. You had to multiply your 
requirements and your possessions, to activate that panel in the kitchen-Drawing-
Room and Master Bedroom and Library — keep going a spiral of needs and people 
to satisfy the needs (The House. P. 5).
The context can include explicit characteristics of the buildings in similar areas: 
(23) “The aunts have always had the back ones and I like this one because it looks out over 
the Parks” (The House. P. 30). In this example, the cognitive features “success” and “high 
social status” are actualized by the house’s location: to look over the Parks. As a standard of 
success in the context, the house with a park view is shown. The definite article and capi-
talization indicate the idea that it is not any park, but Oxford University Parks.
An additional feature of success in life and a high social status marker is the house 
interior — furniture, things, décor items: (24) “Three cups on a tray. Crown Derby. Very 
valuable” (The House. P. 3).
The listed objects serve not so much to describe the interior as to indicate the social 
status of their owner. (25) “Clare’s visitors always wanted to see the hats, along with the 
lift and the china collection in the drawing room and the old photograph albums in 
the study desk. ‘It’s super coming here,’ they said happily” (The House. P. 31).
The profession of the former house owner is emphasized in the novel. Clare’s great-
grandfather was a well-known anthropologist: (26) “‘They’ll be something to do with my 
great-grandfather,’ said Clare. ‘He was an anthropologist. He went to queer places and 
brought things back’” (The House. P. 13).
But many items lost their value over time, became unnecessary, useless. The people 
living in the house now do not have the status and prosperity their relatives had fifty years 
ago, this is no longer necessary. Time makes its own adjustments to the way of life, chang-
ing the line of human values:
(27) …then a house like this became a dinosaur, occupying too much air and ground 
and demanding to be fed by new sinks and drainpipes and a sea of electricity. Such 
a house became a fossil, stranded among neighbours long since chopped up in flats 
and bed-sitting-rooms, or sleek modern houses that had a suitable number of rooms 
for a correct living in the late twentieth century. It, and its kind, stood awkwardly on 
the fringes of a city renowned for old and unbeautiful buildings: they were old, and 
unbeautiful (The House. P. 3);
(28) The house squatted around them, vast, empty, unnecessary and indestructible (The 
House. P. 5).
Lively models several worlds in one novel. Changing the viewpoint, the writer allows 
the reader to see the reality created by her from different sides, gives a versatile assessment 
of the phenomena under consideration.
In the above example, the author’s negative attitude toward the prevailing cultural 
stereotypes is noted. The metaphors — to squat, to be fad, a dinosaur, a fossil, a sea of 
electricity; attributes and epithets — stranded, awkwardly, old, unbeautiful, empty, un-
necessary, and indestructible; antithesis — emphasize the pretentiousness and irrelevance 
of the building, and its internal content, discontent and irritation from the problems that 
it causes.
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2 
355
According to the author’s intention, Clare’s aunts differ from their mother and are an 
example of the opposition of the traditional materialistic system of values and spirituality, 
poetry. They inherited these qualities from their father:
(29) Clare’s great-grandmother, unlike her daughters, Aunt Anne and Aunt Susan, had been 
a lady of fashion. While her husband roamed the world in the search of primitive 
peoples, and, back in Oxford, shut himself away with his books to puzzle out the 
relevance of their mysterious lives, great-grandmother attended garden parties and 
theatres and entertained her friends to luncheon and afternoon tea and dinner 
in the evening. The equipment that had been necessary for all these activities, the 
dresses and capes and gloves and boots, and, above all, the battery of elaborate 
hats, feathered, ribboned, and flowered, lay still in trunks in the attic. The aunts had 
never needed such things (The House. P. 32).
Material values and social status markers are represented in this example by the 
substances: garden parties, theaters, luncheon, afternoon tea, dinner in the evening, the 
equipment, activities, the dresses, capes, gloves, boots, the battery of elaborate hats, as well 
as polysyndeton, reflecting the endlessness and diversity of these things. The opposite val-
ue system is objectified by the description of the great-grandfather’s occupations, which 
implicates spirituality and creativity. In its turn, the description of the house emphasizes 
the fact that spirituality does not bring wealth and luxury:
(30) The curtains were faded in stripes, and the William Morris wallpaper had brown 
marks on it, and damp patches. The silk cushions had holes in them. The aunts’ lives 
had not been spent in a drawing room. They were people who lived in libraries or 
studies (The House. P. 21).
Thus, with the help of the concept HOUSE (its attributes “housing quality”, “loca-
tion”, “interior”, generating the secondary modeling system with the components “success 
in life”, “social status”, “value system”), Lively portrays two life settings that correlate with 
two life positions: “to have” or “to be”. This opposition can only be regarded as a subtle 
reproach, but not criticism of English society because P. Lively as the bearer of traditions 
herself shares the assimilated system of values, although she recognizes the existence of 
alternative attitudes.
In the novel, the house is not so much a means which characterizes the protagonist 
as it is a self-valuable image. Lively models two significant localities, contrasting with each 
other, creating two images of the same house: the first image is the image of the house at 
the beginning of the twentieth century, when Clare’s great-grandfather and great-grand-
mother lived in it; the second image is the house in which the heroine and her aunts live. 
The distance of time separates these two images. The past image is closely connected with 
the present image. The past is in every house corner in the present. There is not much in 
the house that has changed. Furniture, books, dishes, decor — everything has been left 
in its place for many decades. The idea of the past is marked by the past predicates: had 
always been, had become, held, needed, had tipped, had been once, had survived, and had 
called:
(31) The house, which had always been their base, had become also their shell. It held 
everything they needed and they seldom went beyond it (The House. P. 10);
356 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
(32) There was a blob of wax on the page at this point, as though great-grandfather had 
tipped the candle over. The next entry was nearly a week later (The House. P. 78).
The house’s space is significant for the main character and is associated in her mind 
with the uncertainty she is experiencing. Time has slowed down in this house for her, for 
her aunts. But beyond its walls, it continues its running. Clare is in anticipation of change 
and further movement. But she is not quite sure what she is waiting for, what should hap-
pen. Here are her feelings and reasoning about this:
(33) Clocks ticked, the fire sighed and shifted. If there was a world beyond Norham 
Gardens, where urgent and consuming things went on, it seemed very far away. 
Clare thought: I am like the aunts, we are both at a time when nothing much is 
happening to us. They have finished having things happen to them, and I haven’t 
started yet. We just wait. The aunts think backwards mostly, because that suits them 
best. Perhaps I should think forwards, but I can’t because there is nothing to be seen 
for certain except O levels and August in Norfolk. I don’t know what I will be, any 
more than I’m sure what I am now. I am like a chrysalis, turning into something: 
not knowing what is frightening, sometimes (The House. P. 26).
The following example reveals another aspect of the house’s space showing its great 
importance and value for the girl:
(34) Lying in bed that night, in the hinterland between being awake and asleep, when 
things slide agreeably from what is real to what is not, it seemed to her that the house 
itself, silent around her, was a huge head, packed with events and experiences and 
conversations. And she was part of them, something the house was storing up, like 
people store each other up. Drifting into sleep, she imagined words lying around 
the place like bricks, all the things people had said to each other here, piled up in 
the rooms like the columns of books and papers in the library, and she wandered 
around among them, pushing through them, jostled by them (The House. P. 38).
When Clare describes the atmosphere in the house, she compares the house with a 
mythical creature consisting of brick words. She compares it to a sort of encyclopedia full 
of information of all kind.
In general, as can be seen from the examples, the house’s space is a symbol of his-
tory, a bulwark of traditions, protected from external unrest and change; it is a temple of 
knowledge and science.
The conceptual meanings “traditionalism” and “continuity” are expressed in the time 
dimension of the house’s space, which is related to the concept of the cyclic time, while all 
external to the house’s world, experiencing changes, lives in linear time. As E. S. Yakovleva 
writes, 
in the native speakers’ cultural paradigm the ideas of natural cycles, endless returns and 
repetitions of the same events and human destinies on all circles are connected with the 
notion “cyclic time”; with the notion “linear time”, such characteristics as “originality”, 
“uniqueness”, “singularity” of events, and irreversibility of the life process itself are associated 
[Yakovleva 1994: 100–101].
The cyclic time in Claire’s house manifests itself not only in the absence of change, but 
also in certain repetitive actions of the main characters — their habit of moving around 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2 
357
the house. The process of moving around the house is expressed by the predicate “mi-
grated slowly”, which can be seen in some previous examples.
The mythopoeic thinking traits can be traced in the novel, which can be probed 
by the erecting-and-destroying-the-house motives in the notional component of the 
concept.
Through Claire’s work on appropriating the house, familiarizing with tradition is ex-
pressed as it may seem, in insignificant things: decoration, things, and furniture arrange-
ment:
(35) She tidied her own room, excavating drawers and cupboards, filling cardboard boxes 
with rubbish, laboriously, with one hand, arranging books according to subject and 
author. She threw out the chair she had always used at her desk and asked John to help 
her bring up the one from the study, a heavy, dark brown thing with a leather seat that 
swiveled on its base (The House. P. 142).
In the novel, when creating the house’s space, the archetypal motives for the house’s 
destruction are clearly highlighted. The motive for the destruction is figuratively related to 
the slowing or stopping of time. The reason for the house’s destruction is objective nature 
of matter and time: over time, things are shattered under the influence of external natural 
factors. The only obstacle to the inexorable destruction of the house is a person guarding 
the house from destruction or restoring the already destroyed house. The image of the 
destroyed house is created by using the words with the seme ‘dilapidation’: rack, faded, 
brown marks, holes, etc.:
(36) The Outgoings and the Assets, and the cracked guttering that must be repaired and 
the leaking kitchen sink that would have to be replaced (The House. P. 3);
(37) The curtains were faded in stripes, and the William Morris wallpaper had brown 
marks on it, and damp patches. The silk cushions had holes in them (The House. P. 21).
The main reason for the destruction is time. The longer the house remains exposed 
to nature, without human interference, the more active the dilapidating processes are. The 
explication of the cyclic time (the linear time in this case is associated with the presence 
of a thinking subject, a person) in the following examples is revealed in the substances: 
night, spring, summer, winter. Among the names of the cyclic time, the substance “spring” 
is associated with creation, flowering, and purity: (38) “The sunshine gradually filled the 
room and she knew that somehow the winter must have passed, without her realising it, 
and spring have come, or even summer” (The House. P. 115). The substantive night often 
occurs in a close context with the predicates and attributes that characterize winter phe-
nomena and expresses negative connotations: (39) “The blizzard roared all that night” 
(The House. P. 68); (40) “I hate this winter. I felt as though time had stuck. Last night I 
dreamed it was summer”. (The House. P. 120).
As it has been already noted, the only force that can keep a house from destruction is 
a person. As for Claire, she needs money to support the house and put it in order. But there 
is a lack of money. The only way for Claire and her aunts is to have tenants:
(41) You have to fill the gap somehow. The gap, in this instance, had been filled with 
Maureen. ‘A lodger!’ Mrs. Hedges had said. ‘They never heard of a lodger!’ (The 
House. P. 3);
358 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
(42) I would not have thought the aunts would have been all that keen on the idea of a 
lodger, that’s all. They do not mind (The House. P. 76).
One more action is repeated in the novel several times, and it is symbolic. This is the 
predicate “spring-clean”:
(43) ‘Goodness!’ Said cousin Margaret. ‘You could do with a proper spring-clean in here. 
You must let me give you a hand. I love throwing things away’ (The House. P. 72);
(44) ‘Why all these changes, suddenly?’ ‘I’m spring-cleaning,’ said Clare… ‘Those can be 
thrown away,’ said Clare. ‘Those old shoes. I’m just keeping the most important 
things’ (The House. P. 142).
The simple actions of getting rid of old unnecessary things can bring a house to life, 
stop the destruction, and initiate life and time.
Thus, in the novel, the motive of the house’s destruction is connected not with the 
complete destruction, but with the transition from one state of being to another. Man is 
the only force capable of preventing destruction and regulating chaos.
The figurative component of the concept
The application of the metaphorical component of the concept in the novel opens 
the individual expression to understand abstraction. Based on the analysis of the novel, 
we can distinguish the following set of metaphorical models with the concept HOUSE as 
a target domain: 1) the house is a dinosaur / monster; 2) the house is a museum; 3) the 
house is life.
The first model is associated with the monster image, huge, insatiable, requiring more 
and more investments:
(45) …then a house like this became a dinosaur, occupying too much air and ground 
and demanding to be fed by new sinks and drainpipes and a sea of electricity (The 
House. P. 5);
(46) The house, now that she had shut the door, swallowed her, empty, apparently, and 
pitch dark. She felt, for an instant, quite panic-stricken… (The House. P. 130).
A number of constantly recurring attributes in the novel, characterizing the house, 
makes it possible to imagine the monster-house vividly: silent, vast, empty, unnecessary, 
indestructible, greedy, awkward, demanding, big, dark, weird, huge, etc.
Fear of the monster disappears only with the realization that the house is full of fam-
ily and friends, and that it is now Clare’s own creation and transformation: (47) “Home, 
she toured the house, as though she had been away for a long time and needed to make 
sure that everything was all right and in its proper place. Drawing-room, library, study, 
dining-room, spare rooms. She tidied her own room…” (The House. P. 142). 
Claire, in a jocular way, often compares the house to a museum full of old dresses, 
hats, china collection, old photographs, and albums:
(48) They inspected the lavatory. Maureen giggled. Then she said, ‘Sorry, dear, but it is a bit 
of a museum-piece, isn’t it?’ (The House. P. 11);
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2 
359
(49) Like a museum where you’re allowed to take everything out and mess with it (The 
House. P. 32);
(50) It’s stuffed, this place, like a museum (The House. P. 74).
Not only furniture objects, houseware, household items, and furnishings, but the very 
atmosphere of Clare’s life reminds her of a museum. Many things from their house have 
already become museum exhibits. But one of them — the shield, which becomes the cent-
er for events in the novel, is stored in the attic: (51) “She stood looking at her own face, not 
seeing it, thinking about other things. This house. That painted shield in the attic. The 
aunts. Then and now. Yesterday. Tomorrow” (The House. P. 52).
In her dreams, throughout the novel, Claire tries to return this tamburan to the own-
ers — the tribe to whom it once belonged. In the novel, this object personifies the de-
liverance from the past, from chaos, and order returns. But Claire honors and respects 
history, her ancestors. In the end, she understands that the tribe continues to live and has 
been changing all this time, their way of life has been undergoing change and their values 
have changed. The conclusion to which the girl arrives at is obvious. We need to get rid 
of unnecessary things. Life must be filled with new events, new things, relationships, and 
feelings. So, the house, its walls, its space, and filling (physical and spiritual) are associated 
with life:
(52) ‘Step back into the past’, said Clare. ‘In this house we preserve an older, finer way of 
life. Welcome to nineteen thirty-six’ (The House. P. 32);
(53) …and the house had been absolutely still and silent around her. It was like a shell, 
quite without life… (The House. P. 51);
(54) Either way, you will not need it. You will have furnished your own life, with other 
places and other things (The House. P. 153).
The metaphor “house-life” is emphasized by Lively throughout the novel. Clare con-
stantly stresses the presence of frightening silence in the house, especially in the evenings. 
Life seems to stop, and Clare moves to another world, to another life.
Symbolical in this case is the image of the Christmas roses brought by Clare from the 
garden:
(55) “Christmas roses! Susan, she has brought Christmas roses from the garden! An 
inspiration! Clever child. The roses, pale and unreal, like imaginary flowers, flopped 
over the edge of the vase and made of blurred reflections of themselves on the surface 
of the library table” (The House. P. 26).
The substantive roses is a symbol of the continuation of life, beauty, and joy.
At the beginning of the novel, the girl asks herself questions whether it is necessary 
to preserve and keep her ancestors’ history unchanged, or whether the houses and people 
who live in them need to change, or maybe they just need to be destroyed to the ground 
in order to create something new. Clare presents houses as the witnesses of historical pro-
cesses of all kinds — economic, political, cultural, and educational:
(56) It, and its kind, stood awkwardly on the fringes of a city renowned for old and beautiful 
buildings: they were old, and unbeautiful. Perhaps, Clare thought, you should knock 
360 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
own places like this when they are no longer useful. Reduce them to the brick and dust 
from which they came?
Or should you, just because they are old, not beautiful, but old, keep them? 
Houses like this have stood and watched the processes of change. People swept by 
the current, go with it: they grow, learn, forget, laugh and cry, replace their skin every 
seven years, lose teeth, form opinions, become bald, love, hate, argue and reflect. 
Bricks, roofs, windows and doors are immutable. Before them have passed carriages, 
and the carriages have given way to bicycles and the bicycles to the cars that line up 
now, bumper to shining bumper, along the pavement. In front of them have paraded 
ankle-length dresses and boaters and frock coats and plus-fours and duffle coats 
and miniskirts. Through their doors have passed heads, shingled, bobbed, permed 
and unkempt. Within their walls language has changed, and assumptions, and the 
furniture of people’s minds. Possibly, just possibly, you must keep the shells inside 
which such things happen, in case you forget about the things themselves (The 
House. P. 5–6).
Claire is looking for the answers to these questions. She is tormented by the dreams, 
in which the motive of movement and changes in life is figuratively traced through the 
example of an African tribe. Clare meets new people. She goes beyond her shell-house. 
The house frightens her and burdens her with its emptiness at times.
In the end, it is time to part with everything that prevents movement and develop-
ment. The museum cannot be a place to live; there are too many puzzles in it that can keep 
a person from moving. It happens with Clare, she is stuck between the ages, between the 
worlds, and Claire is not able to systematize all the information and knowledge she re-
ceives due to the lack of experience. Her aunt gives her excellent advice, which helps Clare 
start the time in the house and in the life to run: (57) “‘My dear child,’ said Aunt Susan, 
‘you can’t carry a museum round with you. Neither will you need to. What you need, 
you will find you already have. You are a listener’” (The House. P. 154).
Lakoff and Johnson note that 
understanding is necessarily relative to our cultural conceptual systems and it cannot 
be framed in any absolute or neutral conceptual system. Human conceptual systems are 
metaphorical in nature and involve an imaginative understanding of one kind of thing in 
terms of another… metaphorical understanding involves metaphorical entailment, which 
is an imaginative form of rationality [Lakoff, Johnson 1980: 139–140].
By analyzing the metaphorical models of the concept HOUSE in the novel, we un-
cover and clarify the core concept. The symbolic metaphors that are grounded in our 
physical experience provide an essential means of comprehending cultural concepts [La-
koff, Johnson 1980: 33].
Thus, the conducted analysis of the metaphorical component allowed us to draw the 
major lines along which this concept may be linked with other important concepts of 
English culture: TIME, HISTORY, MEMORY, HERITAGE, SELF-CONSCIEOUSNESS 
(MIND), and LIFE. The house, considered as the shell of a person, is simultaneously meta-
phorically conceptualized as an independent living being, which needs the presence of a 
person, his creative and constructive energy.
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2 
361
Conclusion
In this paper, we have demonstrated the procedure of a step-by-step analysis of the 
individual concept HOUSE in Lively’s The House in Norham Gardens and compared the 
obtained results with the verbalization of the same concept in the English explanatory 
dictionaries. This approach allowed us to reveal the common notional or core compo-
nent of the concept, which is perfectly natural, since it is the core component that forms 
the basis for an adequate understanding of the concept by all members of the culture. 
Nevertheless, in Lively’s novel, the meaning of the core components has been extend-
ed — the concept HOUSE acquires the basic features of the concept HOME. This is un-
doubtedly linked with the personification of the house in Lively’s novel, which makes it 
not only a material, but truly spiritual object. The method of linguo-conceptual analysis 
also allowed us to reveal the variety of the images connected with the idea of the house. 
The metaphorical models “the house is a museum”, “the house is life”, and “the house is a 
dinosaur/monster” employed by the author add to the conceptualization of the house as 
a significant value of English culture. The linguistic analysis illustrates that the concept 
HOUSE is associated with English traditions, deeply rooted in previous epochs; the 
house bears the imprints of all cultural layers, therefore it is subject to careful storage. 
The house symbolizes security, permanence, shelter, stronghold, dwelling; family, family 
nest, clan, dynasty; fatherland; human body. It embodies a plea to preserve the purity of 
English culture, traditions, and art that will save and cleanse the human soul. This con-
cept is based on the archaic understanding of the house as an internal, mastered space, 
which confronts the strange, external space of chaos. Thus, it is no coincidence that it 
is the concept HOUSE that is subjected to such a significant extension of meaning. All 
this allows us to conclude that house possesses a salient value component in English 
linguistic culture, which permits the author to extend and expand its core meaning by 
adding various shades of the images. It is its emotional and value charge that makes it a 
very “convenient” object for artistic writing.
The applied procedure of linguo-conceptual analysis reveals broad prospects for fur-
ther study of the individual author’s concept HOUSE in modern English literature in the 
comparative aspect.
Sources
Lively 1974 — Lively P. The house in Norham Gardens. New York: Dutton, 1974. https://archive.org/details/
houseinnorhamgar00live (access date: 20.06.2019).
James 1905 — James H. English hours. London: W. Heinemann, 1905. 315 p.
Dictionaries
Hornby et al. 1995 — Hornby A. S., Cowie A. P., Gimson A. C. Oxford advanced learner’s dictionary of current 
English. 5th ed. Crowther J. (ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. 1430 p. 
LDCE 1995 — Longman dictionary of contemporary English. 3rd ed. Harlow: Longman Group Ltd, 1995. 
1668 p. 
LDELC 1992 — Longman dictionary of English language and culture. Summers D. (ed. director). Harlow 
(Essex): Longman, 1992. 1528 p. 
OCDE 2002 — Oxford collocations dictionary for students of English. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
897 p. 
362 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2020. Т. 17. Вып. 2
ODE 2003 — Oxford dictionary of English. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. 2088 p. 
ODSA 1999 — Oxford dictionary of synonyms and antonyms. Comp. by A. Spooner. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press Inc., 1999. 572 p. 
RHWSOT 1995 — Random House Webster’s school and office thesaurus. New York: Random House, 1995. 
612 p. 
