© St. Petersburg State University, 2021
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2
https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu09.2021.210 
417
UDC 811.111
Viacheslav D. Shevchenko
Samara National Research University,  
34, Moskovskoye shosse, Samara, 443086, Russia 
vds@ssau.ru
Ekaterina S. Shevchenko
Samara National Research University,  
34, Moskovskoye shosse, Samara, 443086, Russia 
e.shevchenko@ssau.ru
Cognitive and pragmatic peculiarities of positive and  
negative food representation in Russian media discourse
For citation: Shevchenko V. D., Shevchenko E. S. Cognitive and pragmatic peculiarities of positive 
and negative food representation in Russian media discourse. Vestnik of Saint Petersburg University. 
Language and Literature. 2021, 18 (2): 417–431. https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu09.2021.210
The article is devoted to the analysis of cognitive and pragmatic aspects of food representation 
in media discourse as well as peculiarities of the language means of such representation. The 
language means used for the realization of cognitive models referring to the spheres of enter-
tainment, cooking and eating as well as the models referring to the negative aspects of food 
representation in Russian media discourse are investigated. The article also studies the con-
nection between the realization of cognitive models and journalists’ pragmatic goals aimed 
at a positive or negative representation of food in media discourse. The cognitive models’ 
dominant components are analyzed. The promotion of such components as participants, food 
and drink, place, entertainment, characteristics of the object (food), action, consequences, 
etc., is driven by journalists’ pragmatic goals aimed at drawing attention to particular dishes 
or preventing the negative consequences of consuming a certain food. Filling the components 
of the cognitive model with particular contents by means of language units results in achiev-
ing the journalist’s goal. The article also investigates the connection between various spheres 
of human life established by the representation of food. The authors refer to the peculiarities 
of the realization of the cognitive model “Food as a source of danger”. The results of the un-
dertaken research can be used for analyzing the realization of cognitive models in other types 
of discourse as well as in theoretical courses on text linguistics, discourse analysis, and media 
linguistics.
Keywords: Russian media discourse, food representation, cognitive models, dominant com-
ponents, food.
Introduction
Food has become not only a means for satisfying one of the basic physiological needs, 
but also the object, which is necessary for completing activities in various spheres of hu-
man life. According to Slávka Tomaščíková, media plays a crucial role in signifying prac-
tices in postmodern societies and in contemporary society media represents the most 
important channels of cultural mediation [Tomaščíková 2015]. Food is an element of 
418 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2
everyday life, culture, entertainment, professional life, etc. It is also able to unite various 
spheres of life, e. g., entertainment, medicine, public events and festivals, etc.
Food and eating have been the object of numerous sociological, cultural, ethnograph-
ic, linguistic, philosophical and other studies [Ivantsova 2018; Olyanich 2015; Pozhidaeva, 
Karamalak 2018; Eddy 2019; Fischler 1988; Matrozi-Marin 2018; Tomaščíková 2012; 2019; 
Shevchenko 2018], which correspond to the tendency of investigating various aspects of 
human existence.
Material and methods
The investigation was undertaken on the basis of Russian media discourse, which 
was studied by Sergey Vorkachev and Elena Vorkacheva [Vorkachev, Vorkacheva 2019]. 
The present article aims to investigate the components of various cognitive models fore-
grounded in media discourse and the language means used for this purpose. The authors 
try to investigate the connection between the cognitive models and the journalists’ prag-
matic goals aimed at a positive or negative representation of food in media discourse. 
While undertaking the research, the method of discourse analysis [Chernyavskaya 2017; 
Shevchenko, Shevchenko 2019], the method of cognitive modelling [Evseeva, Kreidlin 
2017], the method of pragmalinguistic analysis, observation and description techniques 
were applied.
Results and discussions
Russian media discourse contains an article in which a journalist makes a con-
nection between cooking and the sphere of entertainment and the “Еntertainment as a 
source of cooking” cognitive model is realized: Уже в ноябре этого года на прилавках 
появится кулинарная книга с рецептами блюд из киноэпопеи «Звездные войны». Об 
этом 5 августа сообщило издание The Hollywood Reporter. Отмечается, что сборник 
написан от лица одного из персонажей — бывшего шеф-повара из замка королевы 
пиратов Маз Канаты Строно Таггса. Теперь фанаты фильма смогут изучить 
межгалактическую кухню и  приготовить знаменитые блюда. Над проектом 
работали издательство Insight Editions, кинокомпания Disney, кулинарный 
обозреватель Челси Монро-Кассель и автор комиксов Марк Сумерак [Mass media 
2020]. In this case, an American epic space-opera media franchise becomes the source of 
inspiration for cooks.
The journalist uses media space to connect two fairly different activities in the me-
dia — cinema and cooking. These two spheres are connected in the media to emphasize 
the importance of food and cooking in today’s society. Food and cooking in this case are 
given importance via cinema, which also plays an important role in modern society.
One of the dominant components made prominent by a journalist within the “En-
tertainment as a source of cooking” cognitive model is participants. This component is 
dominant because the journalist pays particular attention to the process of cooking where 
a major role is fulfilled by a person; the person in this case becomes the subject of all 
significant actions, which can influence the reader. It is emphasized by means of the lexi-
cal units denoting such participants as a movie character (Отмечается, что сборник 
написан от лица одного из персонажей — бывшего шеф-повара из замка королевы 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2 
419
пиратов Маз Канаты Строно Таггса), film fans (Теперь фанаты фильма смогут 
изучить межгалактическую кухню и  приготовить знаменитые блюда), repre-
sentatives of the publishing house (издательство Insight Editions), a film company 
(кинокомпания Disney), a food writer (кулинарный обозреватель Челси Монро-
Кассель) and a comic book-writer (автор комиксов Марк Сумерак). The participants 
component includes the representatives of cinema, publishing and culinary spheres. Such 
a diverse representation of the participants component proves the significance of food 
and cooking for people engaged in various fields of activity. This significance also helps to 
popularize new ideas about food and cooking among young members of society: involve-
ment of so many different participants into the making of the culinary book and their 
connection with the famous sequel serve as means to persuade the readers, especially the 
young film fans, into cooking.
The food component is not foregrounded within the media text, however, it is 
dominant, because the text is about publishing a cookbook with recipes of dishes from 
“Star Wars” (Уже в  ноябре этого года на прилавках появится кулинарная книга 
с рецептами блюд из киноэпопеи «Звездные войны»).
Another dominant component within the cognitive model realized is consequences. 
This component contains information about the intended result of publishing the cook-
book — fans cooking dishes from the epic film (Теперь фанаты фильма смогут изучить 
межгалактическую кухню и приготовить знаменитые блюда). According to Um-
berto Eco, some literary works can be ascribed a predictive function, when they describe 
something that comes into existence afterwards [Eco 2005: 409]. In this case, the cultural 
influence of the “Star Wars” film is used to introduce new dishes and consequently change 
the existing sphere of food and cooking. The situations connected with cooking in the real 
world are inspired by situations from the imaginary world of cinema; the interrelations 
between the imaginary and real world, which concern food and cooking, underline their 
importance in today’s society. Consequently, the journalist’s pragmatic goal in this case is 
to represent food and cooking as significant objects and activities that play an important 
role in social and cultural life and are able to unite various people and fields of activity.
In another article, a journalist also demonstrates how the food-related events de-
scribed in an animated sitcom can occur in real life: Туристки из Швейцарии покадрово 
повторили похождения героя мультсериала «Симпсоны» Гомера Симпсона. Девушки 
посетили все 23 знаменитые закусочные Нового Орлеана, где в 17 серии 29-го сезона 
побывал мультгерой [Swiss tourists 2020].
The short article is accompanied by a video demonstrating the scenes from the sitcom 
episode and the tourists’ visits to New Orleans cafés and pubs featured in the episode. The 
tourists imitate Homer Simpson’s movements and consume dishes in the same manner.
This short article is used to realize the “Entertainment as a source of eating out” cog-
nitive model because in this case the cafés and bars described in an animated sitcom in-
spire people to visit them in real life. The article is quite short, but it is used to realize a 
cognitive model in accordance with the journalist’s pragmatic goal.
The journalist foregrounds the following dominant components of the “Entertain-
ment as a source of eating out” cognitive model: 
 • Participants: Туристки из  Швейцарии покадрово повторили похождения 
героя мультсериала «Симпсоны» Гомера Симпсона. Девушки посетили все 
420 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2
23 знаменитые закусочные Нового Орлеана, где в 17 серии 29-го сезона по-
бывал мультгерой. The participants component is emphasized by means of the 
lexical units denoting the Swiss tourists (туристки из Швейцарии) and the fa-
mous animated cartoon character (Гомер Симпсон). The real and imaginary par-
ticipants are united by the same actions within one media space and these actions 
refer to eating out. We suppose that participants is the most dominant component 
within the cognitive model, because it refers to interrelations between the imagi-
nary and real world: real people perform the same actions as the imaginary char-
acter and this information is used to persuade the readers to do the same;
 • Place: Девушки посетили все 23 знаменитые закусочные Нового Орлеана, где 
в 17 серии 29-го сезона побывал мультгерой. This component is foregrounded by 
means of the lexical units denoting the eateries located in New Orleans (23 зна-
менитые закусочные Нового Орлеана). The journalist mentions the number of 
eateries (23) and uses the epithet (знаменитые) to underline this component. We 
suppose that the place component is also foregrounded to arouse readers’ interest 
in New Orleans famous bars and cafés and persuade the readers to attend them or 
just eat out;
 • Actions: Туристки из Швейцарии покадрово повторили похождения героя 
мультсериала «Симпсоны» Гомера Симпсона. Девушки посетили все 23 зна-
менитые закусочные Нового Орлеана, где в  17  серии 29-го сезона побывал 
мультгерой. The journalist also foregrounds this component in order to inspire 
people to attend the famous New Orleans eateries, which were mentioned in one 
of “The Simpsons” episodes.
The food component is not mentioned in the article, but we suppose that it is in-
cluded into the place component, which contains information about the places where 
people can eat and relax. This component is also realized in the video, which accompanies 
the text of the article, and demonstrates various dishes consumed by both Homer Simpson 
and the tourists. 
The journalist’s pragmatic goal in this case is to represent food and cooking as sig-
nificant objects that play an important role in social and cultural life. By using cultural 
influence of the famous American animated sitcom, the journalist also intends to inspire 
people to attend the famous New Orleans cafés and pubs and eat out.
Another article also makes a connection between such spheres as food and en-
tertainment: Фестиваль пельменей в  течение месяца будет проходить в  Южно-
Сахалинске. В течение месяца жители города смогут попробовать блюда разных 
народов в рамках гастрономического марафона [Meat dumplings festival 2020]. The 
journalist uses the media text to realize the “Food as a source of entertainment” cognitive 
model, in which the following components are dominant:
 • Food: Фестиваль пельменей в течение месяца будет проходить в Южно-Са-
халинске; В течение месяца жители города смогут попробовать блюда раз-
ных народов в рамках гастрономического марафона; Жители города смогут 
пробовать классические пельмени, равиоли, димсамы, хинкали и вареники 
с  различными начинками и  необычными сочетаниями вкусов; Одновре-
менно с фестивалем на сайте городской администрации начался опрос на-
селения «Самые вкусные пельмени сахалинского производителя»; Подведение 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2 
421
итогов фестиваля состоится на Дне пельменя, который отметят 14 дека-
бря. The food component is emphasized by means of the lexical units denoting the 
particular kind of food — meat dumplings (пельмени), which the article is devot-
ed to. During the festival that will be held in the Russian city of Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk 
the city dwellers will be able to taste different types of meat dumplings belonging 
to various peoples (классические пельмени, равиоли, димсамы, хинкали и ва-
реники с различными начинками и необычными сочетаниями вкусов). The 
use of lexical units referring to various types of meat dumplings help to emphasize 
the dominant component within the cognitive model and demonstrate that food 
can unite different nations: by trying the dishes of other peoples the festival par-
ticipants learn about other countries’ culinary traditions and cultures. In this case, 
food becomes a unique object that in addition to sustaining people, supplies them 
with information about other peoples’ cuisines;
 • Characteristics of the object (food): Жители города смогут пробовать клас-
сические пельмени, равиоли, димсамы, хинкали и  вареники с  различными 
начинками и необычными сочетаниями вкусов. Стоимость блюда, пред-
лагаемого в рамках марафона, не будет превышать 350 рублей, сообщает 
ИА  SakhalinMedia. Одновременно с  фестивалем на сайте городской адми-
нистрации начался опрос населения «Самые вкусные пельмени сахалинско-
го производителя». The journalist foregrounds this component by means of the 
lexical units denoting such characteristics as ingredients (различные начинки), 
taste (самые вкусные), combination of tastes (необычные сочетания вкусов) 
and price (350 рублей). This component is also underlined via the epithet (не-
обычные), which is used to ascribe aesthetic value to the food;
 • Place: Фестиваль пельменей в течение месяца будет проходить в Южно-Са-
халинске. The journalist underlines this component, because the festival takes 
place in the remote Russian city of Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk. We suppose that this is 
done to demonstrate the importance of food, which can be used as a source of 
entertainment in any place;
 • Entertainment: Фестиваль пельменей в течение месяца будет проходить 
в Южно-Сахалинске; К фестивалю присоединились 12 заведений обществен-
ного питания; Подведение итогов фестиваля состоится на Дне пельменя, 
который отметят 14 декабря; Со 2 по 4 ноября в России пройдет восемь 
больших фестивалей, которые приурочены ко  Дню народного единства; 
Каждый год тематика праздников распределяется между федеральными 
округами. The entertainment component is foregrounded by means of фести-
валь and праздник as lexical units, which presuppose having fun and engaging 
in entertainment activities. The word combination День пельменя also refers to 
a festival;
 • Participants: В течение месяца жители города смогут попробовать блюда 
разных народов в рамках гастрономического марафона; К фестивалю присо-
единились 12 заведений общественного питания; Жители города смогут 
пробовать классические пельмени, равиоли, димсамы, хинкали и  вареники 
с различными начинками и необычными сочетаниями вкусов. This component 
is underlined by means of the lexical units denoting the involvement of possibly all 
422 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2
city dwellers (жители города) and some businesses (12 заведений обществен-
ного питания) in the festival.
Foregrounding the dominant components within the structure of the “Food as a 
source of entertainment” cognitive model is determined by the journalist’s pragmatic goal, 
which is to demonstrate that food is an essential object accompanying people in various 
situations, including leisure, entertainment and holiday activities. In this case, the jour-
nalist represents food as an object that becomes the source of entertainment for people: 
meat dumplings (pelmeni) are selected to be the main theme of a festival, thus providing 
people with the opportunity to rest and entertain themselves with a particular dish, which 
the festival is devoted to. Food becomes a unique object that in addition to consumption, 
unites different peoples and supplies the festival participants with information about other 
peoples’ cuisines.
The theme of various food festivals is often covered in the Russian media. One of the 
articles is devoted to a festival, during which the 19th century menu that was used on board 
a ship will be reconstructed: В Севастополе проведут общефлотскую конференцию по 
питанию. Ее приурочат к международному Дню повара. Организаторы обещают 
реконструировать меню середины XIX века, времен первой обороны Севастополя 
[Menu 2020].
As in the other articles, in which the “Food as a source of entertainment” cognitive 
model is realized, the following dominant components are foregrounded in the media 
text:
 • Food and drink: Для приготовления исторических блюд специалистам при-
шлось изучить документальные материалы; Именно по ним и было воссоз-
дано корабельное меню; Особенностью тех лет было то, что на корабле 
не было условий хранения продуктов при низких температурах, поэтому 
ингредиенты сохраняли в просоленном или засушенном состоянии; Опресни-
тельных установок тоже не было, вода на борту была дефицитом, на при-
готовление пищи ее использовали гораздо меньше, чем сейчас; Участникам 
конференции предоставят возможность поучаствовать в мастер-классах 
по приготовлению национальных блюд и выпечке хлеба, исходя из норм про-
довольственных пайков. The author of the text does not specify the types of food 
or dishes, which were included in the ship’s menu. We suppose that this is done 
to arouse the reader’s interest in this event. However, food remains the dominant 
component and it is foregrounded by means of interest in history: the journalist 
appeals to such aspects of history as food, which was consumed on board the ship 
in the 19th century; 
 • Characteristics of the object (food): Особенностью тех лет было то, что на 
корабле не было условий хранения продуктов при низких температурах, по-
этому ингредиенты сохраняли в просоленном или засушенном состоянии; 
Опреснительных установок тоже не было, вода на борту была дефицитом, 
на приготовление пищи ее использовали гораздо меньше, чем сейчас. The 
journalist mentions the following characteristics referring to food and drink: con-
dition of the food, which was stored (просоленное, засушенное состояние) and 
quantity (гораздо меньше), consumed on board the ship in the 19th century. Such 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2 
423
historical information is used in order to stir the reader’s interest in various aspects 
of food consumption in specific marine conditions;
 • Utensils: Как сообщает онлайн-издание  «Новый Севастополь»  со ссылкой 
на пресс-службу Черноморского флота, столы во время дегустации в рамках 
общефлотской конференции будут сервированы также с использованием по-
суды и приборов того времени, чтобы можно было сравнить с сервировкой 
наших дней. This component is underlined in order to immerse the reader in the 
culinary atmosphere of the past. As a result, the journalist also creates the contrast 
between the epochs: the word combinations посуда и приборы того времени 
and сервировка наших дней actualize relevant knowledge referring to utensils of 
the 19th century and the present. The contrast between utensils belonging to differ-
ent epochs foregrounds the dominant component and arouses the reader’s interest 
in the event;
 • Entertainment: Ее приурочат к международному Дню повара; Участникам 
конференции предоставят возможность поучаствовать в мастер-классах 
по приготовлению национальных блюд и выпечке хлеба, исходя из норм 
продовольственных пайков. We suppose that the entertainment component of 
the cognitive model is foregrounded by means of the lexical units denoting the 
international holiday (международный День повара) and master classes, during 
which national dishes and bread can be prepared in accordance with 19th cen-
tury dietary norms (мастер-классы по приготовлению национальных блюд 
и выпечке хлеба). People entertain themselves by participating in master classes, 
trying the menu from the past and enjoying oneself as a result of being immersed 
into the atmosphere of the past. This component is dominant because the media 
text is used to connect the spheres of entertainment and food. In this case, the 
journalist demonstrates that food is an essential element of various activities and 
performs different functions (entertaining, uniting, informing etc.) besides sus-
tainment.
As in the previous example, the dominant components are foregrounded in accor-
dance with the same pragmatic goal of the journalist — to demonstrate that food is an 
essential object. It accompanies people in various situations, including entertainment ac-
tivities and food itself can become the source of entertainment. Here, the pragmatic goal is 
also to persuade the reader that people are able to satisfy one of their basic needs and get 
pleasure not only from consuming food, but also by immersing into the culinary atmo-
sphere of the past, by cooking and consuming dishes with the use of recipes, norms and 
utensils from the past. This all results in people coming into almost direct contact with the 
past and enriching their knowledge and practical skills, which concern food and cooking. 
In such an instance, food becomes the practical means of investigating the past and, con-
sequently, entertaining people.
The article “Гастрофестиваль состоится в  День Тулы и  Тульской области” 
concerns the food festival that will be held in the Russian city of Tula during the City 
Day: В Туле 7 сентября пройдет гастрофестиваль. В этот день отмечается День 
города и региона. В шатрах на Крестовоздвиженской площади устроят дегустации 
чебуреков с картофелем и разных блюд с печеным картофелем, там же можно будет 
выпить кофе по-тульски [Gastronomical festival 2020].
424 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2
The journalist foregrounds the same components as in the other articles, in which the 
“Food as a source of entertainment” cognitive model is realized:
 • Food and drink: В шатрах на Крестовоздвиженской площади устроят де-
густации чебуреков с картофелем и разных блюд с печеным картофелем, 
там же можно будет выпить кофе по-тульски; На улице Менделеевской 
пройдут презентации-дегустации мясных изделий, чая, пряников и пасти-
лы, кофе со сгущенкой, пишет ИА «Тульские известия»; В рамках городского 
чаепития на улице Металлистов гостям предложат отведать картофель, 
печенный со сливками, и угоститься открытыми пирогами, пирожками 
с разными начинками, выпить чая из самовара с конфетами. The food com-
ponent is foregrounded by means of the lexical units denoting various types of 
foods, including street food (чебуреки с картофелем, разные блюда с пече-
ным картофелем, мясные изделия, картофель, печенный со сливками, от-
крытые пироги, пирожки с разными начинками), confectionery (пряники 
и пастила, конфеты) and drink (кофе по-тульски, чай, кофе со сгущенкой).
The journalist mentions foods and dishes that have become the trademark of the 
Tula region. In this case, some foods and dishes become associated with a specific 
region; food becomes the source of information about a particular region and the 
region becomes associated with particular foods;
 • Place: В Туле 7 сентября пройдет гастрофестиваль; В шатрах на Кресто-
воздвиженской площади устроят дегустации чебуреков с  картофелем 
и разных блюд с печеным картофелем, там же можно будет выпить кофе 
по-тульски; На улице Менделеевской пройдут презентации-дегустации 
мясных изделий, чая, пряников и пастилы, кофе со сгущенкой, пишет ИА 
«Тульские известия»; В рамках городского чаепития на улице Металли-
стов гостям предложат отведать картофель, печенный со сливками, и уго-
ститься открытыми пирогами, пирожками с разными начинками, выпить 
чая из самовара с конфетами. This component is underlined by means of the 
lexical units denoting various places in the city: streets and the square. The jour-
nalist foregrounds the place component in order to demonstrate the scale of the 
food festival and its impact on the city’s inhabitants;
 • Entertainment: В Туле 7 сентября пройдет гастрофестиваль. В этот день 
отмечается День города и региона. The journalist mentions the food festival, 
which will be celebrated during the City Day. The festive activities include tast-
ing some foods, which proves that food has become an integral part and means 
of entertaining people as well as satisfying their emotional needs. The media text 
analyzed is aimed at realizing the “Food as a source of entertainment” cognitive 
model, but to be more specific, in this example food is represented as a means of 
entertainment, because it accompanies the actions of the City Day and is only one 
of the themes of the City Day festival. In the article, food is associated with the 
City Day festival, thus particular food and drink (e.g., potato and meat dishes, lo-
cal gingerbread, pies, fruit candy, coffee etc.) are connected with a particular city 
in the reader’s consciousness.
Foregrounding the dominant components within the “Food as a source of entertain-
ment” cognitive model is determined by the journalist’s pragmatic goal to demonstrate 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2 
425
that food does not only accompany people in various situations, including entertainment 
activities, but it also can become a trademark of a particular region or city, a symbol that 
can make this region or city famous. As in the previous example, food also becomes the 
means of investigating the present: by tasting the foods that have become the region’s 
trademark, people gain an opportunity to learn about the region’s culture, economy and 
agriculture reflected in its culinary traditions.
Negative representation of food in the media discourse
Russian media discourse also portrays negative aspects of consuming food in order to 
provide a detailed and substantial picture of the role that food plays in Russian society. An 
article published on the website of “Izvestiya” newspaper informs readers of such nega-
tive consequence of eating fast food as food poisoning: В Москве судебные приставы 
опечатали на 90 дней вендинговые автоматы Healthy Food по продаже еды в бизнес-
центре Lotte и офисном центре ООО «СИБУР» в связи с серией отравлений. Об этом 
в среду, 14 августа, рассказали ТАСС в пресс-службе управления ФССП по Москве 
[Bailiffs 2020].
The present article is used by the journalist to realize the “Food as a source of dan-
ger” cognitive model, which refers to the situation of ceasing the operation of vending 
machines in light of food poisoning. This model also has dominant components, which 
are foregrounded by the journalist by means of using specific language means in accor-
dance with his/her pragmatic goal. The names of dishes that caused food poisoning are 
not mentioned in the media text; the journalist uses some lexical units with the general 
meaning of food (еда, продукты питания), but the food component is foregrounded 
by means of mentioning the name of the vending machines selling food that caused poi-
soning (Healthy Food). The contradiction between the name of the vending machines 
and the food poisoning described in the media text foregrounds the main components of 
the cognitive model food and danger, filling the danger component with the meaning of 
“food poisoning”. Along with food, another significant component is machines, which is 
represented by the lexical units denoting vending machines for selling food (вендинговые 
автоматы Healthy Food по продаже еды).
The participants component is represented by the language means denoting people who 
suffered from food poisoning (3 августа сообщалось, что число людей, отравившихся 
в Москве продуктами питания из вендинговых автоматов Healthy Food, достигло 
99), their occupation (С 16  июля едой из  вендинговых автоматов Healthy Food 
отравились несколько десятков офисных работников), the company that owned 
the vending machines («ООО «До луны и обратно» после массовых отравлений едой 
из  вендинговых автоматов Healthy Food), its director (Глава компании Дмитрий 
Пронин), the officials who undertook legal actions against the company and attesting wit-
nesses (В Москве судебные приставы опечатали на 90 дней вендинговые автоматы 
Healthy Food по продаже еды в бизнес-центре Lotte и офисном центре ООО «СИБУР» 
в связи с серией отравлений; «ООО «До луны и обратно» после массовых отравлений 
едой из вендинговых автоматов Healthy Food было признано Гагаринским районным 
судом Москвы виновным в  совершении административного правонарушения; 
Уточняется, что аппараты опечатали в присутствии понятых), other clients of 
the company (После случившегося от услуг компании отказались 9 % клиентов). The 
426 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2
examples taken from the media text demonstrate that such a diverse representation of the 
participants component makes it dominant within the framework of the “Food as a source 
of danger” cognitive model. The journalist foregrounds the participants component to 
inform the reader of all people, who were engaged in selling and consuming food from 
vending machines as well as the representatives of the legal sphere, who undertook legal 
proceedings against the company that sold the food. This component is dominant in virtu-
ally all the cognitive models analyzed, which can be explained by the fact that journalists 
try to focus the readers’ attention, first of all, to people engaged in various social, cultural 
and political and other processes connected with food.
Such a component of the cognitive model as event refers to food poisoning — the main 
event described in the media, which included dozens of people — mainly office workers 
(серия отравлений, массовые отравления, 3 августа сообщалось, что число людей, 
отравившихся в Москве продуктами питания из вендинговых автоматов Healthy 
Food, достигло 99).
The action component is also significant for the journalist, because he wants to empha-
size the actions taken by the officials after the event. Therefore, this component can also be 
referred to as consequences of the event. This component is foregrounded by means of the 
lexical units denoting mainly legal actions (В Москве судебные приставы опечатали 
на 90 дней вендинговые автоматы Healthy Food по продаже еды в бизнес-центре 
Lotte и офисном центре ООО «СИБУР» в связи с серией отравлений; «ООО «До луны 
и обратно» после массовых отравлений едой из вендинговых автоматов Healthy Food 
было признано Гагаринским районным судом Москвы виновным в  совершении 
административного правонарушения, предусмотренного ст. 6.6  КоАП РФ 
(«Нарушение санитарно-эпидемиологических требований к организации питания 
населения»); 1 августа Гагаринский суд Москвы на три месяца запретил компании 
Healthy Food торговать едой) and the company’s actions aimed at suspending the 
production of food (Глава компании Дмитрий Пронин в  своем Facebook сообщил 
о приостановке производства еды под маркой Healthy Food).
The results of the undertaken research demonstrate that the cognitive model “Food 
as a source of danger” realized in Russian media discourse tends to contain participants, 
event and consequences/action components, because the journalist always informs the 
reader of some dangerous event(s) connected with food that affected a large number of 
people. In the media texts containing this cognitive model, specific attention is paid to the 
consequences of the event, which include both consequences for people’s health and the 
actions aimed at eliminating the phenomena caused by dangerous food.
Foregrounding some components of the cognitive model is determined by the jour-
nalist’s pragmatic goal to exercise social control aimed at preventing food poisoning in 
the sphere of fast food consumption and focus the reader’s attention to negative aspects of 
consuming fast food.
The results of the undertaken research demonstrate that journalists write about the 
specific problems corresponding to the “Food as a source of danger” cognitive model. 
One of the articles is dedicated to a dairy product, in which E. coli was found: Эксперты 
«Росконтроля» проверили ряженку с массовой долей жира 4 % и обнаружили в одном 
из образцов бактерии группы кишечной палочки, а также повышенное содержание 
дрожжей и  плесеней. Результаты исследования были опубликованы во вторник, 
6 августа, на сайте организации [Roskontrol 2020].
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2 
427
The cognitive model realized in the media text has dominant components, which 
are foregrounded in accordance with the journalist’s pragmatic goal. The dominant food 
component is represented by means of the lexical units denoting fermented baked milk 
sold under various trademarks in Russia: Всего экспертизу прошла продукция семи 
брендов: «Вкуснотеево», «Коровка из Кореновки», «Белый город», «Вологжанка», 
«Большая кружка», «Козельская» и «Ряженка из молока нашей дойки».
The dominant characteristics of the object (food) component refers to such features 
of fermented baked milk as:
 • the abundance of some substances (Лучшей была признана ряженка «Вкусно-
теево», единственной претензией к которой стало нехарактерное для на-
туральных молочных продуктов содержание кальция и фосфора (последнего 
существенно больше). По словам специалистов, это может говорить о нали-
чии в составе продукции или используемого сырья добавленных фосфатов);
 • the amount of fats (Замыкает тройку лидеров продукция «Вологжанка» —мас-
совая доля жира в ряженке оказалась на 0,1% ниже указанной в маркировке, 
что, по словам специалистов, допустимо с учетом погрешности);
 • taste (Продукция «Большая кружка», «Коровка из Кореновки» и «Козельская» 
также вызвала у специалистов нарекания по вкусовым показателям);
 • the presence of dangerous bacteria (В ней были выявлены бактерии группы ки-
шечной палочки, а содержание плесеней и дрожжей превысило допустимые 
техническим регламентом значения).
Another dominant component within the cognitive model is participants, which 
is foregrounded by means of the lexical units denoting the experts who analyzed the 
dairy products and the organization, which they represent: Эксперты «Росконтроля» 
проверили ряженку с массовой долей жира 4 % и обнаружили в одном из образцов 
бактерии группы кишечной палочки, а  также повышенное содержание дрожжей 
и  плесеней; «Росконтроль» —частная организация, не имеющая отношения 
к государственной системе контроля качества. As in the other examples, this compo-
nent plays one of the major roles in the process of persuading the reader to choose some 
foods more carefully in order to prevent food poisoning. The journalist indicates the sta-
tus of participants (experts) to demonstrate that the analysis was conducted by specialists, 
who proved that food with such characteristics as the presence of dangerous bacteria can 
pose a danger to people’s health.
The journalist’s pragmatic goal in this case coincides with the goal analyzed in the 
previous example, which is to exercise social control aimed at preventing food poison-
ing. However, the social control is exercised not in the sphere of fast food and street food 
consumption, but in the sphere of people’s every-day life and routine actions: the reader 
is supposed to pay attention to characteristics of food in the process of choosing and pur-
chasing it.
Another article, in which an author writes about the harm that dry breakfast cereals 
cause is also used to realize the “Food as a source of danger” cognitive model: Эксперты 
Роскачества провели исследование готовых сухих завтраков и  обнаружили, что 
они не несут пользы для здоровья. Об этом говорится в  пресс-релизе системы 
мониторинга, поступившем в редакцию «Известий» в среду, 7 августа [Roskachest-
vo 2020].
428 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2
The food component of the cognitive model refers to dry breakfast cereals, including 
chocolate balls (Программа испытаний включила в себя 14 наиболее популярных на 
рынке производителей шоколадных шариков, которые проверили на содержание 
посторонних примесей, пестицидов, группы бактерий кишечной палочки, калия, 
кальция и витаминов, массовую долю клетчатки, цвет, вкус и запах).
The journalist pays particular attention to such component as characteristics of the 
object (food), which contains information about an abundance of substances harmful 
for children’s health (Кроме того, выяснилось, что в более чем половине проверенной 
продукции массовая доля сахарозы превышала суточную норму сахара в  два 
раза), presence of carbohydrates, which leads to a fast digestion and appearance of the 
sense of hunger (В ходе технологической переработки углеводы, содержащиеся 
в  сухих завтраках, переходят в  категорию «быстрых», поэтому после такого 
приема пищи ребенок проголодается уже через час). This component is foregrounded 
to make the reader pay attention to the presence of harmful substances in popular dry 
breakfast cereals.
The participants component is also significant within the cognitive model because in 
addition to consumers (данный параметр позволяет сделать вывод о пользе готового 
завтрака в том числе для детей) it also includes information about the experts who an-
alyzed dry breakfast cereals (Эксперты Роскачества провели исследование готовых 
сухих завтраков и обнаружили, что они не несут пользы для здоровья; заместитель 
руководителя Роскачества Елена Саратцева); it helps the journalist persuade the 
reader to refrain from buying popular dry breakfast cereals.
The consequences component also plays an important role in the process of influenc-
ing the reader and it is foregrounded by means of the language units signifying a sense of 
hunger that appears shortly after eating dry breakfast cereals (В ходе технологической 
переработки углеводы, содержащиеся в сухих завтраках, переходят в категорию 
«быстрых», поэтому после такого приема пищи ребенок проголодается уже 
через час) and illnesses that appear as a result of eating this type of food (Более того, 
систематическое употребление готовых сухих завтраков может привести 
к нарушению обмена веществ и ожирению).
The food, characteristics of the object (food), participants and consequences com-
ponents dominate within the cognitive model in accordance with the journalist’s prag-
matic goal to persuade the reader to lead a healthy lifestyle, avoid food containing harmful 
substances and, as a result, change his/her practice of buying popular dry breakfast cere-
als. We consider that the most efficient components that help the journalist achieve his 
pragmatic goal are characteristics of the object (food) and consequences, because they 
contain information about harmful substances contained in such a type of food and their 
effect on children’s health.
Conclusion
The results of the undertaken research demonstrate that journalists use media space 
to connect two quite different activities in the media — entertainment and cooking. These 
two spheres are connected in the media to emphasize the importance of food and cooking 
in today’s society. Food and cooking are represented as significant objects, which play an 
important role in social and cultural life. The journalists also show that food is an essential 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2 
429
object, which accompanies people in various situations including entertainment activities, 
and that food can become the source of entertainment, e.g., people are able to get pleasure 
not only from consuming food, but also by immersing into the culinary atmosphere of the 
past, by cooking and consuming dishes with the use of recipes, norms and utensils from 
the past. Thus, food becomes the practical means of investigating the past and, conse-
quently, entertaining people.
Our research has also shown that food can also serve as a trademark of a particular 
region or city, a symbol that can make this region or city famous; in this case food also 
becomes the means of investigating the present: by tasting the foods that have become the 
region’s trademark, people get an opportunity to learn about the region’s culture, economy 
and agriculture reflected in its culinary traditions.
The results of the undertaken research also demonstrate that the cognitive model 
“Food as a source of danger” realized in Russian media discourses tends to contain the 
components of participants, event and consequences/action because the journalists’ 
goal is to inform the readers of some dangerous event(s) connected with food that usu-
ally affects a large number of people. Foregrounding some components of the cognitive 
model is determined by the journalist’s pragmatic goal to exercise social control aimed at 
preventing food poisoning in the sphere of fast food consumption and focus the reader’s 
attention on the negative aspects of consuming fast food and food bought in supermar-
kets, including food for children. As a result, the reader is supposed to pay attention to 
characteristics of food in the process of choosing and purchasing it.
Sources 
Bailiffs 2020 — Bailiffs seal off the vending machines after a series of food poisonings. Izvestiya. 2019. https://
iz.ru/910228/2019-08-14/pristavy-v-moskve-opechatali-vendingovye-avtomaty-posle-massovykh-
otravlenii (accessed: 14.04.2020). 
Gastronomical festival 2020  — Gastronomical festival to be held on the day of Tula and Tula region. 
Izvestiya. 2019. https://iz.ru/916962/2019-09-02/gastrofestival-sostoitsia-v-den-tuly-i-tulskoi-oblasti 
(accessed: 14.04.2020).
Mass media 2020 — Mass media announced publishing a cookery book with recipes from “Star Wars”. 
Izvestiya. 2019. https://iz.ru/907210/2019-08-07/smi-anonsirovali-vykhod-sbornika-retceptov-bliud-
iz-zvezdnykh-voin (accessed: 14.04.2020).
Meat dumplings festival 2020 — Meat dumplings festival started in Sakhalin region. Izvestiya. 2019. https://
iz.ru/938687/2019-11-01/festival-pelmenei-startoval-v-sakhalinskoi-oblasti (accessed: 14.04.2020).
Menu 2020  — Menu of the mid-19th century to revive in Sevastopol. Izvestiya. 2019. https://iz.ru/ 
932391/2019-10-15/meniu-serediny-xix-veka-rekonstruiruiut-v-sevastopole (accessed: 14.04.2020).
Roskachestvo 2020  — Roskachestvo informs of harmful breakfast cereals. Izvestiya. 2019. https://
iz.ru/907148/2019-08-07/roskachestvo-rasskazalo-o-vrede-gotovykh-zavtrakov-dlia-zdorovia 
(accessed: 14.04.2020).
Roskontrol 2020  — Roskotrol finds E. coli in fermented baked milk. Izvestiya. 2019. https://iz.ru/ 
906878/2019-08-06/roskontrol-nashel-v-riazhenke-kishechnuiu-palochku (accessed: 14.04.2020).
Swiss tourists 2020 — Swiss tourists copy Homer Simpson’s gastronomical tour in New Orleans. Izves-
tiya. 2019. https://iz.ru/916193/video/turistki-iz-shveitcarii-povtorili-gastrotur-gomera-simpsona-v-
novom-orleane (accessed: 14.04.2020).
430 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 2
