© St. Petersburg State University, 2021
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4
https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu09.2021.416 
893
UDC 81’37
Milica Radulović
University of Niš, 
2, Univerzitetski trg, Niš, 18106, Serbia 
milica.radulovic@filfak.ni.ac.rs 
Positive discourse analysis and latent euphemisation*
For citation: Radulović M. Positive discourse analysis and latent euphemissation. Vestnik of Saint 
Petersburg University. Language and Literature. 2021, 18 (4): 893–909. 
https://doi.org/10.21638/spbu09.2021.416
The article examines some epistemic aspects of latent euphemisation in argumentative dis-
course. The purpose of the work is to show that, by focusing on the notion of voice which links 
talk and context, positive discourse analysis (PDA) can serve as a meta-orientation in analys-
ing alternative discourses. The theoretical framework for the analysis is the pragma-dialectical 
approach to argumentation, which discusses methods and tools for improving discussion and 
reconciling dissensual opinions. According to M. Gerber, some of the potential problems of 
the pragma-dialectical approach are “ethical deficiencies”, “the risk of amorality” and limita-
tions regarding the method for evaluating arguments in accordance with goals, purposes and 
consequences. This article argues that the pragma-dialectical approach to argumentation can 
be implemented to identify latent euphemisation as fallacious reasoning. However, the evalua-
tion of language use as latently euphemistic, and consequently, fallacious, is an epistemic judg-
ment that needs to take into account discussants’ epistemic and epistemological boundaries 
and commitments, including ethical considerations. As communication can lead to miscom-
munication unless a common epistemological background is shared, latent euphemisation 
can be seen as a result of inconsistent epistemological positions whose potential motives and 
consequences need to be addressed. 
Keywords: positive discourse analysis (PDA), pragma-dialectical approach, latent euphemisa-
tion, ambiguity, unclearness.
Introduction
The purpose of this work is to investigate some epistemic aspects of latent euphemisa-
tion in argumentative discourse from the pragma-dialectical perspective [van Eemeren 
2018; van Eemeren, Grootendorst 2004] pursuant to Gerber’s [Gerber 2011] insights into 
the potential problems of the pragma-dialectical methodology, and his suggestions for en-
hancements. Generally speaking, euphemisation is realised in two ways: euphemisation 
can be regarded as socially accepted polite verbal behavior, and it can be used to conceal/
reduce the negative evaluative prosody of the topic discussed. The latter type, latent euphe-
misation, can, in the Barthian sense [Bart 2015], be viewed as a tool for concealing denota-
* This is a modified version of “Positive discourse analysis and latent euphemisation” presented at 
the 16th International Pragmatics Conference organized by the International Pragmatics Association at the 
Hong Kong Polytechnic University from 8 June to 14 June 2019. The work is a part of the project Modern 
Trends in Researching English Linguistics and Anglophone Literature and Culture, conducted at the University 
of Niš — Faculty of Philosophy (No. 183/1-16-1-01).
894 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4
tion under the plane of connotation, by means of which encodings are made to be ambigu-
ous or even contradictory (later discussed with regard to de dicto and de re ambiguities). 
A. M. Abrantes [Abrantes 2005: 93] suggests that a single euphemism can perform both 
the function of veiling and the function of concealing. In other words, identifying latent 
euphemisation is equivalent to making it manifest that the speaker’s point of view is a more 
optimistic encoding with a potential to hide negative realities of life. Words have their own 
semiotic potential, and, therefore, it is not only relevant to study what is, but what could 
be as well [van Leeuwen 2005: 3–5; 26–27], depending on the speaker’s and the listener’s 
commitments. When the listener interprets the speaker’s choice of words as a euphemism 
for…, this suggests two things: firstly, the presence of referential/semantic ambiguity and 
ambivalence that requires an explanation, and secondly, a symptom of the speaker’s and the 
listener’s inconsistent epistemic positions as the (interested, epistemically cautious) listener 
doubts and rejects the speaker’s “epistemic authority” [Kutrovátz 2012: 198]. The rejection 
of the speaker’s “epistemic authority” and the euphemistic tone of discourse presuppose 
that linguistic production often comes from a subjective position (frequently a position of 
authority) and is by no means a part of natural order. This is related to the issue of epistemic 
evaluations in regard to metaepistemological backgrounds/commitments. 
Linguistic structures are not inherently deceptive, but they can be deceptive if that is 
the speaker’s goal-directed intention [Chilton 2011: 176–189]. This is a topic that that has 
been widely examined within critical discourse analysis (hereinafter CDA). The core char-
acteristic of CDA as an approach that developed from critical linguistics and critical se-
miotics is that it is an issue-, rather than a paradigm-oriented type of studies, which makes 
it open to any appropriate theoretical and methodological approach [van Dijk 1995: 17] 
in the operationalisation of the conceptual framework for a critical analysis. CDA has 
been systematically criticized and as a result, its potential and main problems have taken 
shape (e. g., [Blommaert 2005: 31–37; Breeze 2011; Jones 2007]). The core criticism of the 
methodology of CDA is that instead of proceeding from a description via explanation 
to positioning, with interpretation underlying all stages of investigation, positioning is 
placed first and interpretation is marginal [Verschueren 2001: 69]. Similarly, P. E. Jones’s 
[Jones 2007] critique is that “the attempts by Critical Discourse Analysis to build a method 
of political and ideological critique out of such entities “the abstract entities of conven-
tional linguistics and pragmatics” is misguided and inevitably leads to a distorted view of 
the role of communication in society and of the workings of social processes more gener-
ally”. Jones [Jones 2007: 31] suggests a more personalised approach to communication. 
Namely, instead of seeing communication as a process in which individuals are only the 
embodiment of forms and meanings established in advance, we should try to see com-
munication as a form of conscious conduct of particular individuals and real personali-
ties. As for methodology, the search should be guided by rigorous linguistic methodology 
[Verschueren 2001: 69]. 
The current research has the following objectives. Firstly, the research aims to show 
that positive discourse analysis (hereinafter PDA) can be a meta-orientation in analysing 
alternative discourses. Secondly, the work points out that the pragma-dialectical approach 
can explain latent euphemisation by analysing higher-order conditions of a critical dis-
cussion as a background to first-order conditions of argumentation, and, in this man-
ner, include ethical considerations in the examination of arguments. Thirdly, it is dem-
onstrated that the terms identified as euphemistic are evaluated differently in the public 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4 
895
sphere, leading to reasoning/producing arguments for and against practices these words 
describe, with the former emphasising the good, and the latter the bad in these practices, 
thus introducing positive or negative connotations into words. Fourthly, the article shows 
that epistemic evaluation is instrumental in recognising euphemisation. The evaluation of 
words as euphemistic or non-euphemistic depends on our own epistemological and me-
taepistemological positions, which lead us to or distract us from the analysis of any ethical 
aspects regarding the motives and consequences behind the actions discussed.
Theoretical models
Positive Discourse Analysis and Critical Discourse Analysis
As CDA is itself an orientation, rather than a methodology, T. Bartlett [Bartlett 2018] 
suggests that the limitations of CDA could be improved by adopting another orientation, 
PDA, so that a positive transformation could be achieved, as suggested by A. Luke [Luke 
2002] and J. R. Martin [Martin 2004]. Bartlett [Bartlett 2012: 12] argues for the notion of 
voice, or alternative voices, as foundational in any critical study, since it is a means of over-
coming limitations in creativity and “analysing the effectiveness of alternative discourses 
in their local context and beyond”. Bartlett [Bartlett 2012: 7–9] points out that PDA has 
also been subject to its share of criticisms, three of which are prominent: firstly, in reject-
ing the fatalistic positions in some critical approaches, PDA “will underplay the impor-
tance of the determining effects of existing social structures on discourse”. Secondly, “the 
analysis of complex linguistic features remains resolutely textual, with the rhetorical fea-
tures of the language employed analysed in relatively self-contained or universal terms (my 
emphasis)” and, thirdly, “there seems to be a reliance on the trained linguist to provide the 
evaluation of different texts and linguistic resources rather than a concentrated approach 
to assessing the evaluation and acceptance of these texts within the target communities 
themselves”. In order to change the situation, Bartlett [Bartlett 2012: 9] advocates for the 
integration of textual and contextual analyses of communication, language features and 
social structure. To achieve this, the author concentrates on the sociolinguistic concept of 
voice, which links “features of talk to the cultural context of their production and uptake”.
The sociolinguistic notion of voice, as indicated by Bartlett [Bartlett 2012: 12–18], has 
been defined in sociolinguistics in different ways, but what all definitions have in common 
is the work of M. M. Bakhtin [Bakhtin 1981] and Soviet authors of the 1920’s and 1930’s 
based on the assumption that using language means reusing words in ever-changing social 
contexts, which impose their own conventions and contextual constraint. Bartlett explains 
that, for him, voice is not so much “the way in which people manage to make themselves 
understood or fail to do so”, but he suggests that voice is “the means of behaving appropri-
ately through language” or “the customary ways of making oneself understood in different 
contexts”, which is the reason why assuming a particular standpoint/voice does not have 
to lead to understanding. This is to say, as Bartlett further argues, that there may be con-
flicts between different voices, reflecting different codes, and this is especially obvious in 
cases of competition between voices coming from dominant groups and those coming 
from less powerful groups. This converges with J. Blommaert’s [Blommaert 2005: 4] idea 
that “a critical analysis of discourse in contemporary societies is an analysis of voice… the 
way in which people manage to make themselves understood or fail to do so”.
896 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4
Pragma-dialectics and Gerber’s criticisms
Pragma-dialectics relies on the critical-rationalist philosophy of reasonableness that 
we cannot be certain of anything, so in a critical discussion an agreed discussion proce-
dure should be followed to achieve the effect of resolving differences of opinion by testing 
whether a standpoint can be demerited. It is not a final justification of standpoints that 
this approach promotes, but rather a critical testing that leads to resolving a difference of 
opinion on merits [van Eemeren 2018: 29–30]. 
The pragma-dialectical approach proposes an ideal model of a critical discussion 
aimed at resolving a difference of opinion, in agreement with the Socratic ideal of subject-
ing judgements to a dialectical test [van Eemeren 2017: 8; van Eemeren, Grootendorst 
2004: 57]. It accepts and builds on two lines of thinking: “conventional” Searlean insights 
[Searle 1969] into the communicative aspects, and “rational” Gricean insight [Grice 1975] 
into the interactional aspects of argumentative discourse [van Eemeren 2010: 6–7]. As for 
the former, the pragma-dialectical approach agrees that speaking a language is a rule-gov-
erned form of behavior, or performed acts according to a set of constitutive rules [Searle 
1969: 36–41]. These are: 1. identity conditions/clarity: a) the propositional content condi-
tion (comprehensibility), and b) the essential condition (communicative purpose), and  
2. correctness/responsibility conditions: a) the preparatory condition (the speaker needs 
to be capable of realising a speech act), and b) the sincerity condition (the speaker needs 
to be sincere in his/her intentions).
The pragma-dialectical approach to argumentation also proposes the principle of 
communication [van Eemeren 2010; van Eemeren, Grootendorst 1992]. The principle is 
a combination of the four maxims/rules of conduct: Be clear: do not perform any incom-
prehensible speech acts; Be honest: do not perform any insincere speech acts; Be efficient: 
do not perform any superfluous or futile speech act; and Be to the point: do not perform 
any speech acts that do not appropriately relate to preceding speech acts. 
The pragma-dialectical approach to fallacies includes considerations of all violations 
of the discussion rules, not just the logical errors concerning validity [van Eemeren 2018: 
65–69]. Euphemisation can be regarded as a lack of clarity or as the opposite of univocal-
ity, which the listener needs to disambiguate and/or clarify. This is related to the Language 
Use Rule (Rule 10): a) Misusing unclearness (unclearness fallacy: implicitness, indefinite-
ness, unfamiliarity, vagueness) and b) Misusing ambiguity (ambiguity fallacy). In other 
words, the norm is that “Discussants may not use any formulations that are insufficiently 
clear or confusingly ambiguous, and they may not deliberately misinterpret the other 
party’s formulations” [van Eemeren 2018: 61]. This is connected with the rational require-
ment of the maxim of clarity. Both discussants are responsible for achieving understand-
ing. If understanding poses no problem, this is an optimal formulation [van Eemeren, 
Grootendorst 1992: 195–207]. 
Gerber’s [Gerber 2011] criticisms labelled as “ethical deficiencies”, “the risk of amo-
rality” and the limitations regarding the method for the evaluation of arguments in ac-
cordance with goals, purposes and consequences are related to the issues of higher-order 
conditions for a critical discussion. F. H. van Eemeren and R. Grootendorst [van Eemeren, 
Grootwndorst 2004: 36–37; 188–190], however, were aware that their model of a critical 
discussion might be seen as a utopia, and they did recognise the importance of higher-
order conditions in argumentation. They regarded higher-order conditions as the inter-
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4 
897
nal “second-order” conditions/discussion attitudes, which can be limited by emotional 
restraints and personal pressure, and the external “third-order” conditions, or social 
circumstances, such as power or authority. The third-order conditions are also political 
conditions. Van Eemeren and Grootendorst [van Eemeren, Grootwndorst 2004: 37] view 
these conditions as circumstances that are related to “the right to a free exchange of infor-
mation”, voicing criticism, and intellectual pluralism. They further note that “If attention is 
paid to these conditions as well, then the notion of “reasonableness” acquires, apart from 
an intellectual meaning, a social meaning as well”. 
Specifically, Gerber’s [Gerber 2011: 21–22; 27] criticism focuses on the connection 
between the pragmatic and the dialectical, on the function of the pragmatic, or on how well 
particular arguments fulfill their rhetorical purposes, and on the function of the dialectic, 
or on whether or not arguments follow the guidelines for fair dialectical processes. Namely, 
the author argues that pragma-dialectics should have a more clearly defined philosophical 
and theoretical foundation that provides a more ethical method for the examination of 
arguments. As for the dialectical side of pragma-dialectics, it is useful as it has been em-
ployed in argument criticism. However, although pragma-dialectics investigates the rhe-
torical implications of arguments, it is not so clear how critics should evaluate the rhetori-
cal elements of arguments. Therefore, “evaluation based upon purpose, goals, or perceived 
consequences is both incomplete and potentially dangerous”. By way of illustration, “hate 
speech” must have an ideological, moral component as part of the methodology, so that 
arguments in support of those goals can be identified. According to Gerber, in the pragma-
dialectical model, such rhetoric might be criticised on dialectical grounds [Gerber 2011]1.
Epistemic evaluation and epistemological background
Van Eemeren and Grootendorst [van Eemeren, Grootwndorst 2004: 36–37] refer to 
rules and the epistemological status of the critical-rationalistic philosophy of reasonable-
ness as heuristic, not algorithmic, since argumentation (always provisional) is not a me-
chanical process but a social activity in which “the production, analysis, and evaluation of 
argumentative discourse can be raised only by improving the quality of the communica-
tion and interaction between the participants”. On the other hand, the epistemological 
status of the anthropologic-relativistic philosophy is rhetorical as the primary purpose 
of argumentation is to gain the audience’s approval. As a result, all knowledge should be 
employed to achieve this goal. In other words, human knowledge is produced by follow-
ing shared procedures governed by a consensus in a particular community [van Eemeren, 
Grootendorst 2004: 34, 128], which can also mean that the same ethical standards and 
moral values are shared. 
As for theories of argumentation, D. Niño and D. Marrero [Niño, Marrero 2015: 53–
54], for example, draw attention to C. Lumer’s [Lumer 1990; 2005] classification: rhetorical 
(the goal is to persuade), dialogical (the goal is to achieve a consensus), and epistemologi-
cal theories (the goal is to establish truth and justified belief). This is a useful theoretical 
and methodological demarcation, and, as the extended approach to the pragma-dialectical 
1 According to the Online Etymology Dictionary (https://www.etymonline.com/), the adjective prag-
matic comes from Greek pragmatikos, which means “fit for business, active, business-like; systematic”, from 
pragma (genitive pragmatos) “a deed, act; that which has been done; a thing, matter, affair”. The word can 
also be used as a euphemism to denote something bad or disgraceful.
898 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4
“standard theory” suggests, the dialectical theoretical framework has been enriched with 
a rhetorical dimension since effectiveness in argumentative discourse cannot be ignored 
[van Eemeren 2018: 113–116]. The decision to accept or reject argumentation depends on 
the evidence we are given to support or refute it. 
Latent euphemisation can be identified when it is analysed in regard to the epistemic 
issue of de dicto and de re ambiguities/fallacies. The former type refers to ambiguities con-
cerning the truth of the proposition, whereas the latter type refers to ambiguities concern-
ing the way the properties in the external world are determined [Audi 1999: 211]. If we 
face an ambiguity problem that cannot be resolved by relying on the first-order conditions 
of a critical discussion that necessitate specifying meaning for the purpose of facilitating 
the resolution of ambiguities, we need to resort to other methods or analyse higher-order 
conditions/epistemological backgrounds that optimise our epistemic evaluation. Another 
problem that can call for epistemic optimisation at a higher level is underdeterminacy in 
language. For example, the maxim be clear is adjusted in accordance with the speaker’s 
pragmatic optimum in a given context and the metaepistemological commitment which 
can be summarised in the question: “What do we mean when we say of some person that 
he knows or rationally believes some proposition P?” [Fumerton 2006: 8]. The maxim be 
honest and the constitutive rules are matters of ethics, so ethical norms are relevant in the 
analysis of commitments. Both ethics and epistemology discuss norms, and our views of 
what is right and wrong affect the way we acquire knowledge. 
A case study analysis
What follows is a detailed examination of the euphemistic use of the verb phrase 
balance the budget. The examination is digitally intertextual because three digital sources 
were consulted in the analysis. The analysis started with the online Cambridge Dictionary2 
definition of the mentioned verb phrase, following the assumption that (even though this 
is a corpus-informed dictionary) the definition would be neutrally connoted. Following 
this, the second digital source, the Corpus of Global Web-Based English (GloWbE)3 was 
consulted to check whether euphemisation had already been recognised in real life com-
munication (in journals, newspapers, analyses, commentaries, on Amazon Books web-
sites) with regard to political issues. Finally, the phrase was examined in the context of the 
debate “Balanced budget amendment to the US Constitution” given on Debatepedia, an 
internet encyclopedia of pro and con arguments/voices on critical issues4. The pro and con 
arguments, where the latent euphemisation was identified, were taken as the bearers of the 
positive or negative connotations attached to the expression. 
Connotation and higher-order conditions
T. van Leeuwen [van Leeuwen 2005: 29–46] considers two key principles of semiotic 
invention: metaphor (and also metonymy) and connotation5. As for connotation, it can 
2 https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ (accessed: 04.03.2019).
3 https://www.english-corpora.org/glowbe/ (accessed: 04.03.2019).
4 http://www.debatepedia.org/en/index.php/Debate:_Balanced_budget_amendment_to_US_Consti-
tution (accessed: 09.03.2019).
5 See van Leeuwen [van Leeuwen 2005: 37–42] for a more detailed discussion of the linguistic and 
semiotic approaches to the issue of connotation. 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4 
899
be viewed as the lexico-semantic criterion because euphemisms are identified as neutrally 
or less negatively connoted forms than its potential paradigmatically related substitutes. 
However, connotation, i. e., positive or negative values attached to an expression, cannot 
only be observed through the lexico-semantic lens. Attaching connotation is also an epis-
temic evaluation (of inference) that relies on higher-order conditions in argumentation, 
and these are emotive, ethical, social components relative to our interests, motives, and 
ensuing consequences. Connotation can be viewed as the primary motive for creating/
importing euphemisation into a lexical item/an utterance, or the tone of discourse on the 
whole, and it also prompts the creation of novel non-metaphoric, metaphoric and meto-
nymic euphemistic expressions.
Analysis and discussion
The Cambridge Dictionary defines the phrase to balance the budget in the follow-
ing way: “to make the amount of money spent in a budget (= financial plan) equal the 
amount of money taken in during a particular period”. This definition provides the basic 
information about the meaning of the lexical item, on the basis of which we can conclude 
that this neutrally connoted phrase is used in the jargon/context of economics and all the 
related jargons/contexts/topics, such as politics, science, finance, newspapers, journals, 
blogs, commentaries. This is a neutral reading that teaches us the specific “word-to-world 
direction of fit” [Searle 1979]. 
The next step was to check whether the lexical item was identified as a euphemism 
in the Corpus of Global Web-Based English (GloWbe). GloWbE includes samples from 
different varieties of English (US, CA, GB, IE, AU, NZ, IN, LK, PK, BD, SG, MY, PH, HK, 
ZA, NG, GH, KE, TZ, JM), and it also includes samples taken from journals, newspa-
pers, analyses, blogs, commentary, and Amazon Books website (some sources could not 
be accessed). At the time the research was done (access date 4 March 2019), there were 
1092 instances of the verb phrase balance the budget in the corpus, but only one instance 
where this verb phrase was identified as a euphemism for, so it was a hapax legomenon in 
this corpus. Only the form balance the budget was included in the research, not the forms 
balances the budget or balanced the budget. As for the term euphemism for, there were 
1054 examples in the corpus, suggesting that euphemisation was related to many other 
words and phrases. The plural form euphemisms for was not included in the research. 
The article where the verb phrase was identified as a euphemism is entitled “Michael 
Hudson: My Take on Obama’s Big Win”. At the time the research was done, the article was 
followed by 86 comments, which suggests that it did achieve public impact:
Having appointed the Bowles-Simpson commission members who seek to shift the 
tax burden off business onto consumers, the President will pave the way for Bush-type 
privatization. In his first debate with Mitt Romney, Mr. Obama assured his audience that 
they were in agreement on the need to balance the budget (his euphemism for scaling back 
Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid). By christening this “the Great Bargain,” President 
Obama has refined Orwellian doublethink. It is as if George Orwell went to work on Madison 
Avenue6.
6 Example 151 in GloWbe. Michael Hudson: My Take on Obama’s Big Win. Naked capitalism: Fear-
less commentary on finance, economics, politics and power. Posted on November 9, 2012 by Yves Smith. 
900 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4
The text contains the information that Michael Hudson is a Research Professor of 
Economics at the University of Missouri, Kansas City, and a Research Associate at the 
Levy Economics Institute of Bard College. The information is relevant as it shows that 
this euphemistic metonymical transfer, where the instrument of the action scaling back 
is related to the action balancing the budget, was noticed by someone well-versed in eco-
nomics. Therefore, this can be a de dicto ambiguous term, and the ambiguity/fallacy is 
resolved by resorting to a de re reading, by means of which the reader/expert observes 
the instrument of the action and the consequences of the action to make a metonymic 
connection. In this way, the reader changes the word-to-world to “world-to-word direction 
of fit” (Searle 1979: 4). Thus, the phrase to balance the budget is de dicto ambiguous, and 
the ambiguity is latent and cannot straightforwardly be resolved unless observed as a de 
re ambiguity/fallacy, which implies a critical observation of the word-to-world and world-
to-word directions of fit.
It should be noted that although the euphemised use of the phrase is a hapax legom-
enon in the corpus, it does not mean that it is associated only with positive connotations 
in other contexts (even though it is not explicitly labelled as a euphemism). It is also used 
in a neutral/not so negative sense and a highly negative sense. This is shown in the second 
and third examples.
The second example was taken from the article “A New Way to Look at Prices” from 
1996. The context is highly relevant in the evaluation of the phrase:
That suggests the following policy. No one wants to politicize the bureau’s deliberations 
and procedures. So it should proceed quickly, but on its own, to adopt the fixes that both it 
and the commission desire. The fixes could in fact take years, even if pursued expeditiously. 
In the meantime, Congress will come under intense pressure to cut programs to balance the 
budget. But rather than whacking public programs needlessly, Congress and the White 
House could jointly agree to use the commission’s figures to adjust Federal spending and 
taxes by less than the bureau’s measure of inflation. That is a good way to reduce the deficit 
and spread the pain across most of the population. But to protect the poor from a possible 
overcorrection, Congress would insulate Supplemental Security Income and other programs 
for the poor from the adjustment7.
Namely, as G. Brown and G. Yule [Brown, Yule 1983: 234–238] suggest, our process-
ing of incoming discourse can be viewed as the combination of (at least) two activities. 
Bottom-up processing consists in working out the meanings of the words and structure 
of a sentence, as well as constructing a meaning for the sentence. Simultaneously, our un-
derstanding of any discourse includes top-down processing, which consists in connecting 
the context with the composite meaning of the sentences already processed so that we can 
predict what the next sentence means. In other words, the latter type of processing implies 
that a specific background knowledge/knowledge of the world provides the reader with 
an epistemic advantage in text interpretation and possibly the assessment of the author’s 
metaepistemological position regarding motivations, duties, ethical considerations (that 
the reader may agree or disagree with). Some of the things that should be done are the fol-
https://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2012/11/michael-hudson-my-take-on-obamas-big-win.html (accessed: 
04.03.2019).
7 Example 65 in GloWbe. Opinion: A New Way to Look at Prices. The New York Times. December 5, 
1996. nytimes.com/1996/12/05/opinion/a-new-way-to-look-at-prices.html (accessed: 04.03.2019).
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4 
901
lowing: So it should proceed quickly… to adopt the fixes, Congress will come under intense 
pressure to cut programs to balance the budget, This is a good way to reduce deficit, But to 
protect the poor… Congress would insulate. The measures can have positive or negative 
consequences. The last recommendation has positive ethical connotations as it deals with 
the way the poor can be protected. This is another example of de dicto and de re ambi-
guities that need to be resolved by the reader who evaluates the measures and the conse-
quences of the actions described in the text as negative or not so negative. 
The third example shows the critical responses to the article “Federal Reserve Ac-
tively Preparing for the Possibility of U. S. Default”. The phrase to balance the budget is 
interpreted highly negatively, albeit without being explicitly labelled as a euphemism for 
a negative situation:
That got me thinking. What if we adjusted the Federal Budgets for inflation? Loading 
comments… # I wonder Has president Obama, VP Biden, or any member of congress 
recommend that they take a cut in pay and benefits to help balance the budget? I know they 
all agree that Disabled Veterans, the elderly, sick, and the poorest among us should. # Janice 
Josephine Carney: I wonder Has president Obama, VP Biden, or any member  Loading 
comments… # The Republicans are once again being totally unreasonable, just as they were 
during the Bush years, when they would not even tell Democrats where meetings were being 
held! now, the wacko tea party, straight out of Alice in WONDERLAND, is holding the 
entire nation hostage8.
One of the comments is a proposition to reduce the president’s high officials’ pay and 
benefits, and not only cut pay to Disabled Veterans, the elderly, sick, and the poorest peo-
ple. The Republicans are qualified as unreasonable, and one of the consequences is “hold-
ing the entire nation hostage”. The three readings of the phrase show that positive, neutral 
or highly negative connotations are not fixed but variable features, which means that the 
phrase can have controversial readings. 
Debatepedia 
The next thing to do was to examine the use of the phrase to balance the budget in 
relation to the debate “Balanced budget amendment to the US Constitution” given on 
Debatepedia. The analysis highlights the importance of contrasting different views on the 
same topics (the pro and con arguments). Following Bartlett’s [Bartlett 2012: 9] recom-
mendation to integrate the textual and contextual analyses of communication, language 
features and social structure, the research reveals that it is important to pay attention to 
the source of information/the social actor who addresses the public (this is relevant to 
CDA and PDA). Defending one’s standpoint should satisfy the identity and responsibility 
conditions. However, if argumentation is provisional (which means that it is defeasible), 
it is expected that argumentation will be based on optimal pragmatic formulations [van 
Eemeren, Grootendorst 1992: 195–207]. The debate on the abovementioned topic does 
not have a concluding stage (this is digital communication), but the critical examination 
of different standpoints at least leads to the acknowledgement and clarification of differ-
ences. 
8 Example 173 in GloWbe. https://www.english-corpora.org/glowbe/ (accessed: 04.03.2019).
902 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4
Latent euphemisation, here analysed as the misuse of the Language Use Rule, can 
be detected when opposing voices are compared and contrasted. The misuse of language 
can be revealed in inconsistent epistemological positions behind the formulations which 
are ambiguous, and these de re ambiguities and inconsistences can be examined in light 
of motives and consequences behind the actions ambiguously described. Van Eemeren 
and Grootendorst [van Eemeren, Grootendorst 2004: 36–37] qualify the epistemological 
status of the critical-rationalistic philosophy of reasonableness as heuristic, so it is up to 
the reader, who also has his/her own interests (not only the author of the article), to decide 
which interpretation to endorse.
The debate “Balanced budget amendment to the US Constitution” was elaborated 
into four topics, provided in Table. The four topics were followed by pro and con argu-
ments/voices. At the time the research was done, the total number of the con arguments/
voices (14) outnumbered the pro arguments/voices (10). All 24 arguments/voices are pre-
sented in the Appendix9. In this work, differences of opinion are illustrated by means of 
the pros and cons in regard to the first topic, Deficit: Will balanced budget help solve debt/
deficit. Specifically, differences of opinion are illustrated with examples of pro arguments 
(1) and (5) and contra arguments (3), (4) and (5) given in the text following Table.
Table. Four topics related to the debate “Balanced budget amendment to the US Constitution”
Topics
Pro arguments — ten
Con arguments — 14
Deficit: Will balanced budget help solve debt/deficit?
5
6 
Economy: Is balanced budget amendment good for 
economy?
3
5
States: If states have it, should the federal 
government?
2
2
2/3 approval: Is supermajority rule for approving 
deficits wise?
0
1
The pros and cons are the two confronted positions/two groups of opposing voices/
beliefs that allow the reader to evaluate alternatives critically, since they inform us of a 
range of the whys and wherefores for implementing or not implementing balancing the 
budget in accordance with possible consequences. The examples (a) “Balanced budget 
amendment will help solve fiscal crisis” and (b) “General statements in favour of balanced 
budget amendment” are illustrations of the arguments which support the balanced budget 
amendment: 
(a) This constitutional amendment is necessary to force Congress and the President to 
confront and resolve our cancerous fiscal crisis. It will end the annual budget deficit 
and stop the bleeding. And it will prevent future Congresses or Presidents from relying 
on tax increases or borrowing to balance the budget.10
9 This Debatepedia page was last modified on August 9, 2011. 
10 Dr. Jim Garlow Chairman, Renewing American Leadership Action. The Case for a Balanced Budget 
Amendment Now. Statement before the House Judiciary Committee Subcommittee on the Constitution. 
May 13, 2011. http://www.debatepedia.org/en/index.php/Debate:_Balanced_budget_amendment_to_US_
Constitution (accessed: 04.03.2019).
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4 
903
(b) This is a responsible, commonsense plan that would hold Congress accountable, get the 
country’s fiscal house in order and make sure everybody has some skin in the game, all 
while protecting Social Security and not forcing an end to Medicare as we know it.11
These viewpoints show that the BBA to the Constitution can be seen as a duty (much 
as it can be unpleasant) to force Congress and the President to confront and resolve the 
fiscal crisis, end the annual budget deficit, stop relying on tax increases or on borrowing 
to balance the budget. In (b), the positive connotation is reinforced by the premise that 
Social Security will be protected. 
However, the con arguments express concerns regarding this amendment, and when 
negative consequences become negative connotations, other de dicto and de re readings 
are proposed. The examples (c) “Balanced budget Amend violates intended flexibility of 
Const”, (d) “Unworkable to measure and define balanced budget”, and (e) “Amend would 
create Const. crisis, court battle w/ each budget” are illustrations of the arguments which 
criticise the balanced budget amendment: 
(c) and (d): Our Constitution outlines in the broadest terms how the federal system works. 
It contains few numbers, is by design remarkably flexible, and assumes that underlying 
comity and good intentions will prevail despite strong partisan passions. Amending it 
is a complex process for good reason, and we should do it precisely and with foresight 
and caution. A balanced-budget amendment violates those criteria.12
(e) Since arguments over whether a budget is truly and honestly balanced are endless, a 
constitutional requirement of balance would make resolving the argument the province 
of the federal court system, raising two critical problems. Timing: The president 
proposes a budget to Congress around Feb. 1 to take effect Oct. 1. At any point in that 
process, lawsuits could be filed by members of Congress and other citizens and interest 
groups. Typically it takes two or three years to get a case to the U. S. Supreme Court, 
and there likely would be thousands of cases annually, many frivolous. Thus we could 
never be sure that any budget actually met the constitutional requirement until it was 
far too late. Power: In resolving the conflict, federal judges would have the unwanted 
power to decide how to balance it — what to cut and what revenues to raise. As lifetime 
appointees, they would be beyond the reach of citizens or Congress if their decisions 
were unacceptable or inadequate. The primary power of the legislative branch — the 
purse — and the primary power of citizens — the vote — would be nullified [Merritt 
2011].
Namely, from these points of view, amending a budget is a complex process for good 
reason. In addition, arguments over whether a budget is honestly balanced are endless, 
and a constitutional requirement of a balanced budget would make resolving the argu-
ment the province of the federal court system, which leads to further problems some of 
which are timing and power. The former means that there are no guarantees that any 
budget actually met the constitutional requirement until it was far too late, and the latter 
means that in resolving the conflict, federal judges would have the unwanted power of de-
11 Missouri’s U. S. senators, Democrat Claire McCaskill. http://www.debatepedia.org/en/index.php/
Debate:_Balanced_budget_amendment_to_US_Constitution (accessed: 09.03.2019).
12 Davis Merritt. Balanced-budget amendment is unworkable. The Wichita Eagle. August 2, 2011. 
http://www.debatepedia.org/en/index.php/Debate:_Balanced_budget_amendment_to_US_Constitution 
(accessed: 09.03.2019) [Merritt 2011].
904 
Вестник СПбГУ. Язык и литература. 2021. Т. 18. Вып. 4
ciding how to balance the budget, what to cut and what revenues to raise, so the legislative 
branch and the power of citizens would be nullified.
Conclusion
Lumer [Lumer 2005] criticises the rhetorical approach as its goal in argumentation is 
persuasion, the establishment and amplification of a belief defended by the speaker [van 
Eemeren et al. 2014: 395]. This, as further noted, eventually leads to a situation where we 
do not strive for truth and knowledge, but we often end up with false beliefs, and diso-
rientations about the world we live in, which can have extremely negative consequences. 
The research shows that we can have different opinions about the same issues depend-
ing on our epistemological commitments and our understanding of the relation between 
words and the world. This suggests that a dialectical approach to argumentation is more 
promising as it shows that only if limitations are accepted, can we overcome them. Also, 
the constitutive rules stipulate that, when different opinions are expressed, arguing for or 
against an issue makes sense only in the name of responsibility and sincerity. From this it 
follows that a dialectical approach to developing, defending and rejecting argumentation 
is, in accordance with the constitutive rules, more committing.
This specific analysis shows that latent euphemisms can be understood as instances 
of violating the dialectical Language Use Rule. Pragmatically optimal formulations can 
be identified as fallacious if and when they are tested with other formulations proposed 
by other social actors. Finally, the problem of misusing unclearness and ambiguity can 
be more easily identified if language use is examined against the background of critical 
epistemology. In this sense, the Language Use Rule is a dead letter unless second and thir-
order conditions are taken into account. Higher-order conditions allow methodological 
enhancements, by means of which we are more likely to understand why we talk at cross 
purposes and less likely to disregard and marginalise a relevant issue as a non-issue. 
Sources
Cambridge Dictionary — Cambridge Dictionary. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/ (accessed: 04.03.2019).
GloWbe  — Corpus of Global Web-Based English (GloWbe). https://www.english-corpora.org/glowbe/ 
(accessed: 04.03.2019). 
Debatepedia  — Debatepedia. http://www.debatepedia.org/en/index.php/Welcome_to_Debatepedia%21 
(accessed: 04.03.2019).
Online Etymology Dictionary — Online Etymology Dictionary. https://www.etymonline.com/ (accessed: 
28.02.2019).
