Нестерова В. Е. Политическая лингвистика. 2021. № 5 (89). С. 128–138. 
128 
УДК 811.111'42:811.111'38 
 
ББК Ш143.21-51+Ш143.21-55 
ГСНТИ 16.21.27 
Код ВАК 10.02.20 
DOI 10.26170/1999-2629_2021_05_15 
V. E. Nesterova 
Ural Law Institute of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Russia, Ekaterinburg, Russia 
ORCID ID: 0000-0002-7467-0029  
 E-mail: karaelan@mail.ru. 
Verbalization of the “Brutality” Component as a Constituent Part  
of Linguistic Modeling of the Image of American Police  
in Pro-Government and Opposition Newspapers 
ABSTRACT. The article is devoted to the study of the linguistic process of modeling of the image of the US Police as a 
social institution in pro-government and opposition newspapers through verbalization of the component “brutality” within 
the strategy of evaluative argumentation framework. The strategy of evaluative argumentation is one of the most effective 
strategies of modeling of the image of a social institution. Within this strategy, by way of appealing to the addressee's emo-
tions, the addresser creates a certain model, verbalized in value-based components and being capable to produce a verbal 
impact by forming the addressee's opinion and attitude to a certain object or phenomenon. The author analyzes the argumen-
tative acts representing the activity of the US law enforcement agencies in such pro-government and opposition newspapers 
as “The Associated Press”, “The Wall Street Journal”, “The Washington Post” and “The New York Times” over the period 
from January 6 to January 20, 2021. As a result of the analysis of the argumentative acts explicating the “brutality” compo-
nent, the author comes to the conclusion that the strategy of evaluative argumentation in pro-government and opposition 
newspapers is implemented in different ways, and the speech techniques differ radically. The information policy of the pro-
government publications “Associated Press” and “The Wall Street Journal” is characterized by a general neutral tone of 
commenting on events without using negatively colored vocabulary referring to the law enforcement agencies, who are rep-
resented as professionals doing their duty, trying by all means to minimize the number of possible victims, protecting life and 
health of citizens, as well as defending state and political values such as democracy, human rights and freedoms. The opposi-
tion newspapers “The Washington Post” and “The New York Times” model the negative image of the social institution of 
Police verbalizing the “brutality” component in news reports where officers are represented as enemies of the state and the 
people, destroyers of ethical, cultural and historical values, and individuals who exceed their official authority and violate 
the rights and freedoms of the citizens. 
KEYWORDS: journalism; media linguistics; media discourse; media texts; mass media; mass media language; politi-
cal discourse; linguistic means; linguistic modeling; brutality; argumentative acts; law enforcement agencies; American 
police; opposition newspapers; pro-government newspapers; verbal impact; category 
AUTHOR’S INFORMATION: Nesterova Valeria Evgen’evna, Senior Lecturer of Department of Foreign Languages, 
Ural Law Institute of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Russia, Ekateinburg, Russia. 
FOR CITATION: Nesterova, V. E. Verbalization of the “Brutality” Component as a Constituent Part of Linguistic 
Modeling of the Image of American Police in Pro-Government and Opposition Newspapers / V. E. Nesterova // Political 
Linguistics. — 2021. — No 5 (89). — P. 128-138. — DOI 10.26170/1999-2629_2021_05_15. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Most researchers from various fields of sci-
ence agree that the theoretical description of 
institutions as social phenomena requires the 
creation of their effective and efficient model. 
Thus, in the English-language linguistic model, 
the term “social institution” is divided into the 
concept of “institute”, that is more related to 
social norms, and “institution”, that means so-
cial establishments [Bychenkov 1996: 7]. The 
main approaches to the social institution of Po-
lice can be considered normative [Glotov 2003: 
14; Berger 1996: 84], functional [Veblen 1984: 
200-201; Smelzer 1994: 659], socio-cultural 
[Akhiezer 1997: 32; Pyanov 2011: 163] and in-
formational [Korneychuk 2007: 11], which allow 
creating legal, social, value and conceptual 
models respectively. Our research focuses on 
the socio-cultural approach that allows us to 
create a value model of the social institution of 
Police. 
The main functions of law enforcement agen-
cies all over the world are to protect life, health, 
rights and freedoms of citizens. That is, on the 
one hand, law enforcement bodies act as defend-
ers of the highest value — a person, and on the 
other hand, the social institution of the Police can 
itself become a universally recognized value or 
anti-value. Public opinion about the Police force 
and its activities is usually formed from personal 
contacts of citizens with law enforcement officers 
and throughout the Mass Media. 
Language, in addition to its main communi-
cative function, can implement a pragmatic 
function, that is, act as a tool of speech influ-
ence that controls communicative processes, 
contributing to the formation of constructive val-
ue motivations, orientations and meanings. 
Modern linguistics within the framework of the 
© Nesterova V. E., 2021 
Nesterova V. E. Political Linguistics. 2021. No 5 (89). P. 128–138. 
129 
communicative-pragmatic direction focuses on 
two main aspects of language and considers it 
as: 1) a means of communication and 2) a tool 
of speech influence capable of managing com-
munication processes. 
Many Russian and foreign authors (R. M. Bla-
kar [Blakar 1987], T.A. van Dyke [Dyke 2000], 
M. R. Zheltukhina [Zheltukhina 2007], O. S. Is-
sers [Issers 1999], O. N. Parshina [Parshina 
2005], G. G. Pocheptsov [Pocheptsov 1998], 
N. B. Ruzhentseva [Ruzhentseva 2004], etc.) 
study the methods of speech behavior that are 
the most effective in terms of the speaker's 
strategies. Currently the Mass Media have the 
greatest pragmatic potential, which has turned 
into an instrument of social power capable of 
influencing the organization of political and so-
cial institutions activities, modeling their image 
in the minds of the population as well as. In this 
regard we can state that there is a certain de-
pendence of political and social processes on 
the linguistic specificity of Media messages. 
The Media give high priority to coverage of 
social institutions’ activities, especially law en-
forcement agencies that are the part of the ex-
ecutive branch of government and, in fact, a 
projection of the state power. Many domestic 
and foreign studies are devoted to the study of 
the Police image (T. V. Agapova [Agapova 2011], 
A. I. Zolotaiko [Zolotaiko 2020], D. G. Perednya 
[Perednya 2016], R.J. Richard [Richard 2015], 
J. Schultz [Schultz 2019], W. L. Wayne [Wayne 
2015], etc.). That is why the study of the pro-
cess of modeling the Police image by linguistic 
means in the Media discourse is a promising 
and relevant area of research in cognitive and 
political linguistics. 
In our opinion, the most effective strategy 
for linguistic modeling of the law enforcement 
agencies image in the Media discourse is the 
strategy of evaluative argumentation since the 
category of evaluation has a strong influential 
potential since it is expressed in positive or 
negative evaluative statements and appeals to 
the emotions of the addressee. 
The purpose of the study is to analyze 
argumentative acts representing the activities of 
the US law enforcement agencies in pro-
government and opposition newspapers in or-
der to identify the component “brutality” verbal-
ized in the process of linguistic modeling of the 
image of the social institution of Police in the 
newspaper discourse. 
To achieve this purpose the following tasks 
are implemented in the study: 
– to select news reports about the activities of 
the American Police force in pro-government 
and opposition newspapers; 
– to analyze argumentative acts in order to 
identify the “brutality” component within the 
evaluation argumentation strategy, verbalized in 
the process of linguistic modeling of the US Po-
lice image in pro-government and opposition 
newspapers; 
– to compare the speech techniques used in 
the process of verbalization of the “brutality” 
component and modeling the US Police image of 
in pro-government and opposition newspapers. 
2. METHODOLOGY 
The contextual analysis of language mate-
rial based on the interpretive approach within 
the strategy of evaluative argumentation is cho-
sen as the main method of analyzing argumen-
tative acts in news reports representing the im-
age of the social institution of the US Police in 
pro-government and opposition newspapers. 
Within the framework of the evaluation argu-
mentation strategy the author identifies the 
component “brutality” in the selected argumen-
tative acts aimed at linguistic modeling of the 
American Police image. The research material 
is based on fragments of news reports taken 
from such American pro-government and oppo-
sition newspapers as “The Associated Press”, 
“The Wall Street Journal”, “The Washington 
Post” and “The New York Times”. 
Despite the fact that all print and electronic 
Media in the United States operate on a com-
mercial basis and position themselves as 
guardians of democratic norms, striving to pre-
sent news reports as objectively as possible in 
order to avoid accusations of supporting a par-
ticular party, there has recently been a tenden-
cy to divide the American press into pro-
government and opposition. Based on the so-
cio-political orientation of the publication, head-
lines and subject matter, the peculiarities of in-
formation presentation and its interpretation, the 
use of linguistic means of representing the ma-
terial, the following division can be made: “The 
New York Times” and “Washington Post” can 
be attributed to the opposition press, while “As-
sociated Press” and “Wall Street Journal” are 
pro-government newspapers. 
Thus, by the continuous sampling method 
for the period from January 6 to January 20, 
2021, the news reports covering the US Police 
activities were selected. In the selected news 
reports, argumentative acts explicating the “bru-
tality” component and aimed at linguistic model-
ing of the image of the social institution of the 
US Police were identified and analyzed at lexi-
cal and phraseological, and grammatical and 
stylistic levels. Thus, the unit of analysis is the 
component “brutality” as a part of the structure 
of the Police image, verbalized by linguistic 
means in the argumentative act in the newspa-
per discourse. The choice of this period is 
linked with ongoing political events in the United 
Нестерова В. Е. Политическая лингвистика. 2021. № 5 (89). С. 128–138. 
130 
States of America, in particular, the armed con-
frontation between supporters of the two politi-
cal parties in the Capitol, provoked by the re-
sults of the US presidential election. 
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
All social institutions have arisen with ne-
cessity to meet certain needs in society and are 
focused on the production of a certain value. 
The success of the functioning of an institution 
depends on the recognition of the significance 
of a produced value by society. Thus, the insti-
tution of the Police emerged from the need to 
ensure the protection of public order and the 
fight against criminality, thereby implementing 
the internal security of the state. 
The concept of “value” includes a “set of the 
most significant meanings and cultural domi-
nants for the concrete culture reflected in the 
value picture of the world, determined the per-
ception of the people, their mentality” (Translat-
ed by V. Nesterova) [Karasik 2002: 166-167]. 
The main way of reflecting the system of values 
is the category of language assessment, which 
is understood by linguists as “the socially fixed 
attitude of native speakers (“good” — “bad”, 
“legal” — “illegal”, “friend” — “enemy”) to a non-
linguistic object, to the facts of language and 
speech” [Hidekel, Koshel 1981: 7]. All assess-
ments contain not only approval or condemna-
tion, but also elements of rational knowledge, 
therefore they can replace logical argumenta-
tion in a text, and often they acquire the charac-
ter of arguments themselves. When evaluating 
an object, a linguistic personality always relies 
on perfect image of this or that object which can 
be recognized as positively valuable, negatively 
valuable, value-neutral [Ivin 1998]. In this re-
gard the social institution of the Police, acting 
as the defender or, conversely, an exterminator 
of certain values, either begins to be perceived 
by society as a value, or is devalued by citi-
zens, while police officers begin to be perceived 
as aggressors and destroyers of generally ac-
cepted values and norms. 
Over the past decades the Media has rapid-
ly penetrated into the political sphere and 
turned into one of the tools of the political pro-
cess — the fourth power. In this regard in addi-
tion to the main functions of the Mass Media 
(collecting and distributing information, select-
ing and commenting on information, forming 
public opinion, spreading culture), it seems ap-
propriate to single out another important func-
tion of the Media — the politicization of society 
and political education of the general population 
[Kosmodemyanskaya 2014: 176]. 
Regardless of the type of Media (pro-
government, independent, opposition), all me-
dia texts contain provocative and manipulative 
components to one degree or another and are 
aimed at forming or changing the addressee's 
worldview, introducing this or that message into 
his mind. Modern Mass Media have moved 
away from direct pressure audience’s opinion 
so the ideological attitude, position and as-
sessment of the author of the message are not 
imposed, but are implicitly suggested to the ad-
dressee, who following the addressee per-
ceives the given assessment on an emotional 
or intellectual level. 
In order to study the process of modeling 
the Police image by linguistic means we will 
analyze argumentative acts representing the 
US Police activities and explicating the “brutali-
ty” component separately in pro-government 
and opposition newspapers. 
3.1. Verbalization of the component 
“brutality” in the pro-government 
newspapers “Associated Press”  
and “Wall Street Journal” 
The main goal of pro-government newspa-
pers is to support the state power and its deci-
sions, ensure national security by neutralizing 
harmful effects in the political, national, confes-
sional, 
economic, 
information 
and 
other 
spheres of society's life and forming a “healthy” 
Media background. Let's analyze the argumen-
tative acts representing the activities of the 
American Police force in “The Associated 
Press” and “The Wall Street Journal” which are 
considered to be pro-government publications. 
In the news article entitled “Explainer: Who 
has been charged in the deadly Capitol riot?” 
(AP of 9/01/2021) [Richer 2021] the “brutality” 
component is verbalized in the following argu-
mentative act: 
“A woman from California was shot to death 
by Capitol Police and three other people died 
after medical emergencies during the chaos”. 
However, the use of firearms by police officers 
is explained and justified to some extent by the 
author of the article in the following fragment: “A 
Capitol Police officer died after he was hit in the 
head with a fire extinguisher as rioters de-
scended on the building and many other offic-
ers were injured”. The perlocative effect in this 
contrast is enhanced by using the hyperbo-
lization “A Capitol Police officer died after he 
was hit in the head with a fire extinguisher …” 
and “… many other officers were injured” aimed 
at drawing the addressee's attention to the 
events taking place. 
The similar method can also be seen in the 
passage taken from the article “After deadly 
siege, lawmakers ask why police so outnum-
bered” (AP of 9/01/2021) [Daly, Balsamo 2021]: 
“Only a few dozen guarded the West front 
of the Capitol when they were rushed by thou-
sands of rioters bent on breaking into the build-
Nesterova V. E. Political Linguistics. 2021. No 5 (89). P. 128–138. 
131 
ing. Armed with metal pipes, pepper spray and 
other weapons, the mob pushed past the thin 
police line. … Throughout the melee, police 
officers were injured, mocked, ridiculed and 
threatened. One Capitol Police officer, Brian 
Sicknick, died Thursday night from injuries suf-
fered during the riot. Four other people also 
died because of the Capitol violence”. In this 
argumentative act the addresser also uses the 
method of contrast in order to hyperbolize the 
problem and appeal to the addressee's com-
passion towards the police officers who find 
themselves in the minority (Only a few dozen 
guarded the West front of the Capitol) against a 
crowd of angry armed rebels (they were rushed 
by thousands of rioters … Armed with metal 
pipes, pepper spray and other weapons, the 
mob pushed past the thin police line). The use 
of conversion (Throughout the melee, police …), 
gradation (metal pipes, pepper spray and other 
weapons; injured, mocked, ridiculed and threat-
ened) and root repetition (rioters, riot) intensi-
fies the influential effect in audience’s percep-
tion. The author deliberately withholds the in-
formation about specific victims and causes of 
death (Four other people also died because of 
the Capitol violence) and focuses on one victim 
(One Capitol Police officer, Brian Sicknick, died 
Thursday night from injuries suffered during the 
riot) in order to divert the attention of readers 
from the brutal actions of law enforcement 
agencies, which may cause people’s death. 
The perlocutionary effect is achieved through-
out the use of allusion “the West front of the 
Capitol”, which is a reference to real military 
operations, the adverb “Only a few”, epithets 
“thin police line”, “the Capitol violence”, grada-
tion “Armed with metal pipes, pepper spray and 
other weapons”, “police officers were injured, 
mocked, ridiculed and threatened”. The ad-
dresser builds trust with the audience by quot-
ing the words of the authority figure, Gus 
Papatanasius, Chairman of the Capitol Police 
Officers' Union: 
“he was “incredibly proud of the individual 
officers whose actions protected the lives of 
hundreds of members of Congress and their 
staff” … “Not one member of Congress or their 
staff was injured. Our officers did their jobs. … 
Our law enforcement partners that assisted us 
were remarkable””. The addresser in his argu-
ment appeals to the highest value — human life, 
which is above all. In the given argumentative act, 
the intentions of the addresser are achieved 
through the use of the adverb “incredibly proud”, 
metaphor “the lives of hundreds of members of 
Congress and their staff”, epithet “remarkable”. 
In the following fragment taken from the 
news report entitled “Chicago police union head 
apologizes 
for 
defending 
mob” 
(AP 
of 
9/01/2021) [Babwin 2021] the author also ex-
plains and justifies the brutality of police officers 
towards citizens, resulting in the death of sev-
eral people: 
“The president of the Chicago Police offic-
ers’ union apologized Friday for defending the 
pro-Trump mob that stormed the U.S. Capitol 
and downplaying this week’s violence that left 
four people dead. … Catanzara’s initial com-
ments drew harsh criticism from Chicago Mayor 
Lori Lightfoot and others for his characterization 
of the ugly assault on the nation’s Capitol that 
left four other people dead, including a woman 
who was shot by police. … “The National FOP 
rejects this gross mischaracterization and sees 
the incident for what it was — a violent mob of 
looters and vandals, visiting fear and destruc-
tion on one of our nation’s most sacred spac-
es…”. The reference to the apology words of 
the President of the Chicago Police Union, John 
Cantasar, exemplifies building trust with audi-
ences throughout an appeal to the highest val-
ues of American society — life (violence that 
left four people dead) and democracy (destruc-
tion on one of our nation’s most sacred spac-
es). Usage of epithets “harsh criticism”, “ugly 
assault”, “gross mischaracterization”, “violent 
mob” and metaphors “mob of looters and van-
dals”, “visiting fear and destruction” with a 
negative connotation is aimed at strengthening 
the perlocutionary effect of hyperbolization of 
the incident consequences, in which, on the 
one hand, law enforcement agencies provided 
insufficient resistance to the rebels (apologized 
Friday for defending the pro-Trump mob that 
stormed the U.S. Capitol and downplaying this 
week’s violence that left four people dead), on 
the other hand, their actions resulted in several 
deaths including the murder of a woman by a 
police officer (the ugly assault on the nation’s 
Capitol that left four other people dead, includ-
ing a woman who was shot by police). 
The news article “Police Identify Woman 
Shot by Capitol Police as Ashli Babbitt” (WSJ of 
7/01.2021/) [Duehren, Caldwell, Lubold 2021] 
reports about the murder of Ashley Babbitt by a 
Capitol police officer, whose name is not men-
tioned by the author of the article: 
“Ms. Babbitt died Wednesday after being 
shot by the Capitol Police, the police said, as 
she was part of the crowd aiming to disrupt the 
certification of the 2020 presidential election. 
Capitol Police identified Ms. Babbitt Thursday 
and said the officer who shot her had been 
placed on leave while her death is investigated. 
… “One Capitol Police officer discharged a ser-
vice weapon striking an adult female,” he said. 
“She was transported to a local hospital where 
all lifesaving efforts failed. She was pronounced 
deceased””. This passage contains a neutral 
Нестерова В. Е. Политическая лингвистика. 2021. № 5 (89). С. 128–138. 
132 
statement of the fact that a police officer had 
used service weapons against a civilian. The 
absence of emotionally colored vocabulary indi-
cates the legitimacy of the police officer's ac-
tions in the current situation, with the mention of 
the fact that the victim was among a crowd of 
rebels (she was part of the crowd aiming to dis-
rupt the certification of the 2020 presidential 
election). The author of the article also reports 
that timely measures were taken against the 
police officer (the officer who shot her had been 
placed on leave while her death is investigat-
ed). In the following argumentative act the bru-
tality of the police officer who shot Ashley Bab-
bitt is mitigated by describing the actions of 
other officers assisting the victim: “In the vide-
os, multiple police officers appear to provide 
first aid to Ms. Babbitt, who was taken to a hos-
pital and later died of her injuries”. 
In the next example the murder of a woman 
is mentioned casually: 
“Before long, police evacuated lawmakers 
from both the Senate and House chambers, a 
woman was shot and someone set off gas mu-
nitions. … On the stairs of the west side of the 
Capitol, dozens of protesters, some yelling 
“Take the Capitol!” faced off with police, who 
sprayed them with chemical agents” (WSJ of 
6/01/2021) [Wice, Lucey, Restuccia 2021]. 
However, this passage focuses on the actions 
of police officers spraying chemicals into the 
crowd (… faced off with police, who sprayed 
them with chemical agents), that can be 
viewed, on the one hand, as police brutality to 
citizens, and on the other hand, as the police 
officers’ choice of the most humane methods 
subdue aggressive protesters: 
““You’re a traitor to your country,” one man 
shouted. Others chanted “Pence is a traitor” 
and “stop the steal””. The addresser’s intentions 
are achieved by referring to the words of former 
President D. Trump who spoke out in defense 
and support of law enforcement agencies: “At 
2:38 p.m., Mr. Trump tweeted: “Please support 
our Capitol Police and Law Enforcement. They 
are truly on the side of our Country. Stay 
peaceful!””. 
The news article “Police Identify Five Dead 
After Capitol Riot” (WSJ of 8/01/2021) [Safdar, 
Ailworth, Seetharaman 2021] reports: 
“That brings the total fatalities from the day’s 
events to five, including 35-year old Ashli Bab-
bitt, whom Capitol Police shot on Wednesday as 
she tried to climb through a window in the Capi-
tol. The numbers could rise, authorities said, as 
more people have been injured”. The neutral 
tone of the message without commenting on 
events and using expressive vocabulary implicit-
ly appeals to the addressee’s mind, urging read-
ers to rational evaluation of facts and events. 
3.2. Verbalization of the component 
“brutality” in the opposition newspapers 
“The Washington Post” and “The New York 
Times”. 
The main task of the opposition newspa-
pers is to criticize the existing government and 
regime, interpret information by exposing 
myths, false attitudes, manipulative strategies 
and tactics of communicants, putting forward 
their own alternative projects for the develop-
ment of society as well. Let's consider the ar-
gumentative acts presented in the opposition 
newspapers “The New York Times” and “Wash-
ington Post” aimed at verbalizing the “brutality” 
component while representation of the Ameri-
can Police activities. 
The article entitled “Racial Double Standard 
of Capitol Police Draws Outcry” (NYT from 
07/01/2021) [Eligon 2021] highlights the biased 
attitude of law enforcement agencies to various 
categories of citizens, and the “brutality” com-
ponent is explicated in the following argument: 
“Black Lives Matter activists across the 
country expressed outrage on Thursday at what 
they said was a tepid response from law en-
forcement officers to mostly white protesters, 
saying it stood in stark contrast to the aggres-
sive tactics they have endured for years — of-
ficers in full riot gear who have used tear-gas, 
rubber bullets and batons. It also underscored 
the country’s uneven system of justice, many 
said, and lent credence to their insistence that 
Black people are devalued and viewed as in-
herently dangerous. … Black activists noted 
that when they have planned protests, the po-
lice have rarely seemed ill prepared”. The ad-
dresser’s intentions to create a negative image 
of the Police force are realized throughout the 
use of epithets “tepid response”, “aggressive 
tactics”, “uneven system of justice”, “inherently 
dangerous”, and irony “Black activists noted 
that when they have planned protests, the po-
lice have rarely seemed ill prepared”. 
One more example of the actualization of 
the “brutality” component of police officers can 
be the following argumentative act from the 
same article: 
“While protesting the police killing of a 
Black teenager in Ferguson, Mo., several years 
ago, Johnetta Elzie said she was manhandled 
by officers. She said they pointed rifles at Black 
women who were pushing toddlers in strollers 
and cursed at them to turn around. Similar 
scenes unfolded all summer, as police officers 
clashed with scores of Black Lives Matter pro-
testers. Many times, officers used batons and 
chemical agents to disperse crowds. … Last 
summer, a peaceful violin vigil in Aurora, Colo., 
to memorialize a Black man who died during a 
police arrest was disrupted when officers in riot 
Nesterova V. E. Political Linguistics. 2021. No 5 (89). P. 128–138. 
133 
gear charged the park and dispersed pepper 
spray, sending families with children fleeing. 
The police argued that there was a small group 
of agitators among the crowd, a contention dis-
puted by many in attendance, who had been 
sitting on the lawn listening to people play the 
violin when the police descended. … Video of 
the mass arrest showed one officer firing pep-
per spray at the people being arrested, “who all 
appear to be on the ground and complying with 
police commands,” Judge Catherine D. Perry of 
Federal District Court wrote in her injunction. 
Javad Khazaeli, a lawyer representing several 
of the plaintiffs, said that even though his clients 
were peaceful, “The police made the choice to 
use violence.”. Police officers in this context are 
represented as subjects who exceed their offi-
cial powers without sufficient reason (Johnetta 
Elzie said she was manhandled by officers; a 
peaceful violin vigil …. was disrupted when of-
ficers in riot gear charged the park and dis-
persed pepper spray, sending families with 
children fleeing), showing extreme cruelty to 
civilians (… they (Police) pointed rifles at Black 
women who were pushing toddlers in strollers 
and cursed at them to turn around) and violat-
ing human rights and freedoms (Many times, 
officers used batons and chemical agents to 
disperse crowds). In order to achieve a 
perlocutionary effect the addresser quotes the 
words of Judge Catherine D. Perry who points 
out the excessive brutality of the Police towards 
people who already obey their demands (… 
one officer firing pepper spray at the people 
being arrested, “who all appear to be on the 
ground and complying with police commands”), 
and in the argumentative act of the lawyer 
Javad Hazaeli the “brutality” component is ac-
tualized implicitly (The police made the choice 
to use violence. 
The actualization of the “brutality” compo-
nent is also realized in the next example: 
“Federal law enforcement officers swept 
people into unmarked vans and used pepper 
spray to clear peaceful protesters so that Mr. 
Trump could pose for photos in front of a 
church. … “When the looting starts, the shoot-
ing starts,” he wrote. …But he was far kinder to 
those who stormed the Capitol. Hours after the 
riot began, he finally posted a video saying, 
“You have to go home now.” He added, “We 
love you. You’re very special.”. … Shenita 
Binns, 42, a federal employee who has taken 
part in numerous racial justice protests in 
Washington and around the country, said she 
was struck by the deference given to the mob 
on Wednesday. Usually protesters cannot get 
anywhere near the Capitol steps. At a demon-
stration in June, some participants tried to talk 
to police officers. “They stood there like statues 
and did not say anything back except stuff like 
‘Don’t come up here’ or ‘Don’t go that way,” she 
said. “If anybody tried to get past them they 
were pushed back down” (NYT of 20/01/2021) 
[Dewan, MacFarquhar, Kanno-Youngs, Watkins 
2021]. The whole argumentative act is built on 
the contrast of supporters and opponents of 
ex-President D. Trump, which is the implemen-
tation of the “friend or foe” category, where 
the Police are classified as “aliens” and the of-
ficers are presented as persons who commit 
arbitrariness pushing violently (used pepper 
spray) peaceful protestants into unmarked 
vans, which is inherently ironic since these ac-
tions are aimed at ensuring the protection of 
D. Trump who is not in danger in fact (so that 
Mr. Trump could pose for photos in front of a 
church). The use of the simile (like statues) 
intensifies this ironic effect. The perlocutivonary 
effect is enhanced by quoting the rather sarcas-
tic words of D. Trump: “When the looting starts, 
the shooting starts”, expressing gratitude to the 
instigators of the rebellion in support of him 
“You have to go home now” He added, “We 
love you. You’re very special” to whom the Po-
lice were not as aggressive as their peaceful 
opposition, according to Shenita Binns' words: 
“They (Police) stood there like statues and did 
not say anything back except stuff like ‘Don’t 
come up here’ or ‘Don’t go that way,”. 
In the news report “Rioters breached the 
Capitol as they waved pro-police flags. Police 
support on the right may be eroding, experts 
warn” (WP от 09.01.2021) [Lang, Jamison 
2021] one can see the actualization of “brutality 
component”. The author of the article uses a 
powerful convergence of speech techniques 
and tactics in order to implement the strategy of 
evaluative argumentation. So, in the passage 
“… a tide of anger and frustration rose as offic-
ers pushed them back. Nearly three hours after 
the building was breached, police cleared the 
grounds and used batons and chemical muni-
tions to confront the mob. A man standing on a 
folding chair on the Capitol lawn raised a middle 
finger towards the advancing line of police and 
joined in a chant quickly sweeping the grounds: 
“Traitors! Traitors! Traitors!” usage of the meta-
phor “… a tide of anger and frustration rose”, 
euphemism “raised a middle finger”, exclama-
tion “Traitors! Traitors! Traitors!” serve to en-
hance the negative impact on the conscious-
ness of the addressee, and police officers are 
perceived as traitors to the nation, destroyers of 
ethical 
and 
cultural-historical 
values. 
The 
perlocutionary effect on modeling the “brutality” 
component is enhanced by reference to the 
words of the participants of the uprising: 
“You should be on our side,” a woman in a 
Trump 2020 sweatshirt called at them. “We the 
Нестерова В. Е. Политическая лингвистика. 2021. № 5 (89). С. 128–138. 
134 
people’ means police, too!”. “Is this honoring 
your oath? Pushing patriots around?” another 
man yelled as an officer shoved him back with 
baton. … “The blue does not back you,” reads a 
message posted in a pro-Proud Boys group 
with more than 37,000 followers on social me-
dia app Parler. “They back the men who pay 
them”. Usage of modal verb (should be), per-
sonal (you, we) and possessive pronouns 
(your) serve to oppose people to Police realiz-
ing the “friend or foe” category. The passage: 
“At racial justice protests over the summer, fol-
lowing a spate of police killing of Black men and 
women around the country, protesters called 
police “murderers” and implored officers to join 
them or take a knee to express solidarity” aims 
to exaggerate the situation throughout the 
technique of “labeling” “murderers” on the 
police officers. 
4. CONCLUSION 
In conclusion it should be noted that in or-
der to introduce the necessary image into the 
addressee's consciousness, the addresser cre-
ates a certain verbal model that allows minimiz-
ing the recipient's efforts spent on processing 
and interpreting incoming information. All Media 
texts contain additional evaluative meanings 
aimed at manipulating the addressee's mind 
through the implementation of various commu-
nicative strategies and tactics, language tools 
and techniques. One of the most effective strat-
egies for modeling the image of the social insti-
tution of the Police in English-language printed 
publications is the strategy of evaluative argu-
mentation, which is based on the values formed 
in the public consciousness. 
The category of language evaluation is an 
immanent characteristic, it has a pragmatic poten-
tial and can be introduced in a message both ex-
plicitly through a statement, reasoning, assump-
tion, imperative, and implicitly through the use of 
invective means, tropes and figures of speech, 
imposing presuppositions and labeling, euphe-
mization and dysphemization, the use of semantic 
gaps that the addressee is forced to unconscious-
ly fill with judgments imposed on him. 
The strategy of evaluative argumentation in 
pro-government and opposition newspapers is 
implemented in various ways, and speech 
techniques are radically different from each 
other. Thus, the information policy of the pro-
government publications “Associated Press” 
and “Wall Street Journal” is characterized by a 
general neutral tone of commenting on events 
without using negative-colored vocabulary of 
law enforcement agencies. The main methods 
of verbalization of the component “brutality” are 
the use of epithets (7 contexts), metaphors 
(4 contexts), contrast (2 contexts), hyperbo-
lization (2 contexts), gradation (2 contexts) and 
allegory (1 context). American pro-government 
newspapers often appeal to the intellect of the 
audience and a sense of patriotism, so in ar-
gumentative acts they refer in most cases to the 
words of statesmen and officials who inspire 
confidence among the citizens of the country. 
Despite the fact that police brutality against the 
population is covered both in “The Associated 
Press” and in “The Wall Street Journal”, how-
ever, the actions of law enforcement agencies 
are opposed by the anti-social behavior of pro-
testers, and the Police forces are represented 
as professionals who perform their duty, trying 
to minimize the number of possible victims by 
all means, standing up for the protection of the 
life and health of citizens, defending state and 
political values-democracy, human rights and 
freedoms as well as. 
Opposition newspapers are aimed at dis-
crediting the current government and its repre-
sentatives, so law enforcement agencies, being 
the executive branch of government, also often 
become the object of sharp criticism. “The 
Washington Post” and “The New York Times” 
model the negative image of the social institu-
tion of the Police by verbalizing the “brutality” 
component in news reports in which officers are 
represented as enemies of the people, destroy-
ers of ethical, cultural and historical values, 
persons exceeding their official powers and vio-
lating the rights and freedoms of citizens. Ar-
gumentative acts in opposition newspapers of-
ten appeal to the emotions of the addressees, 
and trusting relationships with the audience are 
built by referring to the opinion of judges, pros-
ecutors, lawyers. The main speech techniques 
that contribute to modeling the negative image 
of the Police in English-language opposition 
newspapers are epithets (4 contexts), the eval-
uation category “friend-foe” (2 contexts), irony 
(2 contexts), the techniques of “labeling” (1 con-
text), contrast (1 context), metaphor (1 context), 
euphemism (1 context). 
In this study the author does not set the 
task of conducting a contextual analysis within 
the framework of specific tactical schemes im-
plementation. 
The prospect of the further research may 
become the analysis of argumentative acts that 
verbalize the “professionalism” component in 
order to model the image of the US Police in 
pro-government and opposition newspapers. 
 
MATERIALS 
1. Babwin, D. Chicago police union head apologizes for de-
fending mob / Don Babwin. — Text : electronic // AP News. — 
2021. — 9 Jan. — URL: https://apnews.com/article/donald-
trump-joe-biden-police-chicago-88fd580f63a09488281a99309b 
338529 (date of access: 30.06.2021). 
2. Daly, M. After deadly siege, lawmakers ask why police so 
outnumbered / Matthew Daly, Michael Balsamo. — Text : elec-
Nesterova V. E. Political Linguistics. 2021. No 5 (89). P. 128–138. 
135 
tronic // AP News. — 2021. — 9 Jan. — URL: https://apnews. 
com/article/riots-police-coronavirus-pandemic-racial-injustice-27 
df9afce0c16032fc040944789d2f33(date of access: 30.06.2021). 
3. Dewan, S. Police Failures Spur Resignation and Complaints 
of Double Standards / Shaila Dewan, Neil MacFarquhar, Zolan 
Kanno-Youngs and Ali Watkins. — Text : electronic // The New 
York Times. — 2021. — 7 Jan.— URL: https://www.nytimes. 
com/2021/01/07/us/Capitol-cops-police.html (date of access: 
21.06.2021). 
4. Duehren, A. Police Identify Woman Shot by Capitol Police 
as Ashli Babbitt / Andrew Duehren, Alicia A. Caldwell and Gor-
don Lubold. — Text : electronic // The Wall Street Journal. — 
2021. — 7 Jan. — URL: https://www.wsj.com/articles/police-
identify-woman-shot-by-capitol-police-as-ashli-babbitt-116100 
55730 (date of access: 30.06.2021) 
5. Eligon, J. Racial Double Standard of Capitol Police Draws 
Outcry / John Eligon. — Text : electronic // The New York 
Times. — 2021. — 7 Jan. — URL: https://www.nytimes. 
com/2021/01/07/us/capitol-trump-mob-black-lives-matter.html 
(date of access: 21.06.2021). 
6. Lang, M. J. Rioters breached the Capitol as they waved pro-
police flags. Police support on the right may be eroding, experts 
warn / Marissa J. Lang and Peter Jamison. — Text : electronic // 
The Washington Post. — 2021. — 8 Jan. — URL: https://www. 
washingtonpost.com/local/capitol-police-officers-support/2021/ 
01/08/a16e07a2-51da-11eb-83e3-322644d82356_story.html?u 
tm_source=twitter&utm_campaign=wp_main&utm_medium=soc
ial (date of access: 21.06.2021). 
7. Richer, A. D. EXPLAINER: Who has been charged in the 
deadly Capitol riot? / Alanna Durkin Richer. — Text : electronic // 
AP News. — 2021. — 9 Jan. — URL: https://apnews.com/article/ 
joe-biden-donald-trump-district-of-columbia-riots-arrests-3cd5b 
02adb60929afdd058aee620eea9 (date of access: 30.06.2021). 
8. Safdar, K. Police Identify Five Dead After Capitol Riot / 
Khadeeja Safdar, Erin Ailworth and Deepa Seetharaman. — 
Text : electronic. — URL: https://www.wsj.com/articles/police-
identify-those-killed-in-capitol-riot-11610133560 (date of access: 
30.06.2021) 
9. Wise, L. The Protesters Are in the Buolding/ Inside the Cap-
itol Stormed by a Pro-Trump Mob / Lindsay Wise, Catherine 
Lucey and Andrew Restuccia. — Text : electronic // The Wall 
Street Journal. — 2021. — 6 Jan. — URL: https://www.wsj.com/ 
articles/the-protesters-are-in-the-building-inside-the-capitol-stor 
med-by-a-pro-trump-mob-11609984654 
(date 
of 
access: 
30.06.2021). 
REFERENCES 
10. Agapova, T. V. Information Policy in the System of 
Measures to Form a Positive Image of the Law Enforcement 
Agencies of the Russian Federation: on the materials of the 
Transport Department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Rus-
sia in the Central Federal District : thesis … of Cand. of Polit. 
Sciences / Agapova T. V. — Moscow, 2011. — 177 p. — Text : 
unmediated. [Informatsionnaya politika v sisteme meropriyatiy po 
formirovaniyu pozitivnogo imidzha pravookhranitel'nykh organov 
RF: na materialakh Upravleniya na transporte MVD Rossii po 
Tsentral'nomu federal'nomu okrugu : dis. … kand. polit. nauk / 
Agapova T. V. — Moskva, 2011. — 177 s. — Tekst : 
neposredstvennyy]. — (In Rus.) 
11. Akhiezer, A. S. Russia: Criticism of Historical Experience 
(Socio-cultural Dynamics of Russia) / A. S. Akhiezer. — 2nd ed., 
rev. and add. — Novosibirsk : Siberian Chronograph, 1997. — 
Vol. 1 : From the Past to the Future. — 804 p. — Text : unmedi-
ated. [Rossiya: kritika istoricheskogo opyta (sotsiokul'turnaya 
dinamika Rossii) / A. S. Akhiezer. — 2-e izd., pererab. i dop. — 
Novosibirsk : Sibirskiy khronograf, 1997. — T 1 : Ot proshlogo k 
budushchemu. — 804 s. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — 
(In Rus.) 
12. Berger, P. L. Invitation to Sociology: a Humanistic Perspective / 
P. L. Berger ; transl. from Engl. under ed. of G. S. Batygin. — Mos-
cow, 1996. — 84 p. — Text : unmediated. [Priglashenie 
v sotsiologiyu: gumanisticheskaya perspektiva / P. L. Berger ; per. 
s angl. pod red. G. S. Batygina. — Moskva, 1996. — 84 s. — 
Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — (In Rus.) 
13. Blakar, R. M. Language as an Instrument of Social Power / 
R. M. Blakar. — Text : unmediated // Language and Modeling of 
Social Interaction. — Moscow, 1987. — P. 88—125. [Yazyk kak 
instrument sotsial'noy vlasti / R. M. Blakar. — Tekst : 
neposredstvennyy 
// 
Yazyk 
i 
modelirovanie 
sotsial'nogo 
vzaimodeystviya. — Moskva, 1987. — S. 88—125]. — (In Rus.) 
14. Bychenkov, V. M. Institutes: Supercollective Formations and 
Impersonal Forms of Social Subjectivity / V. M. Bychenkov. — 
Moscow : Russian Academy of Social Sciences, 1996. — 976 p. — 
Text : unmediated. [Instituty: sverkhkollektivnye obrazovaniya i 
bezlichnye formy sotsial'noy sub"ektnosti / V. M. Bychenkov. — 
Moskva : Rossiyskaya akademiya sotsial'nykh nauk, 1996. — 
976 s. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — (In Rus.) 
15. Veblen, T. Theory of the Leisure Class: Economic Research of 
Institutions / T. Veblen. — Moscow : Progress, 1984. — 368 p. — 
Text : unmediated. [Teoriya prazdnogo klassa: ekonomicheskoe 
issledovanie institutsiy / T. Veblen. — Moskva : Progress, 
1984. — 368 s. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — (In Rus.) 
16. Glotov, M. B. Social Institute: Definition, Structure, Classi-
fication / M. B. Glotov. — Text : unmediated // Sociological 
research. — 2003. — No. 10. — P. 13—19. [Sotsial'nyy institut: 
opredelenie, stroenie, klassifikatsiya / M. B. Glotov. — Tekst : 
neposredstvennyy // Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniya. — 2003. — 
№ 10. — S. 13—19]. — (In Rus.) 
17. Dyck, T. A. van. Language. Cognition. Communication / 
T.A. van Dyck. — Blagoveshchensk : BGK named after I. A. Bau-
douin de Courtenay, 2000. — 308 p. — Text : unmediated. 
[Yazyk. Poznanie. Kommunikatsiya / T. A. van Deyk. — Blago-
veshchensk : BGK im. I. A. Boduena de Kurtene, 2000. — 
308 s. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — (In Rus.) 
18. Zheltukhina, M. R. Functions of Mass-medial Discourse / 
M. R. Zheltukhina. — Text : unmediated // Genres and Types of 
Text in Scientific and Media Discourse : interuniversity collection 
of scientific articles / resp. ed. A. G. Pastukhov. — Oryol : 
OGIIK : PF “Kartush”, 2007. — Issue 5. — P. 191—201. 
[Funktsii mass-medial'nogo diskursa / M. R. Zheltukhina. — 
Tekst : neposredstvennyy // Zhanry i tipy teksta v nauchnom i 
mediynom diskurse : mezhvuz. sb. nauch. tr. / otv. red. A. G. Pas-
tukhov. — Orel : OGIIK : PF «Kartush», 2007. — Vyp. 5. — 
S. 191—201]. — (In Rus.) 
19. Zolotayko, A. I. Metaphorical Modeling of the Image of 
Law Enforcement Agencies in the Non-institutional Police Inter-
net Discourse in the United States and Great Britain : thesis … of 
Cand. of Philol. Sciences / A. I. Zolotayko. — Ekaterinburg, 
2020. — 246 p. — Text : unmediated. [Metaforicheskoe mode-
lirovanie obraza pravookhranitel'nykh organov v neinstitu-
tsional'nom politseyskom internet-diskurse SShA i Velikobrita-
nii : dis. … kand. filol. nauk. / A. I. Zolotayko. — Ekaterinburg, 
2020. — 246 s. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — (In Rus.) 
20. Ivin, A. A. Value / A. A. Ivin. — Text : unmediated // New 
Philosophical Dictionary / comp. A. A. Gritsanov. — Minsk : 
V. M. Skakun Publishing House, 1998. — P. 819—821. [Tsen-
nost' / A. A. Ivin. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy // Novyy filosof-
skiy slovar' / sost. A. A. Gritsanov. — Minsk : Izd-vo V. M. Ska-
kun, 1998. — S. 819—821]. — (In Rus.) 
21. Issers, O. S. Communicative Strategies and Tactics of Rus-
sian Speech : monograph. — Omsk : Omsk State Univ., 1999. — 
285 p. — Text : unmediated. [Kommunikativnye strategii i taktiki 
russkoy rechi : monogr. — Omsk : Omsk. gos. un-t, 1999. — 
285 s. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — (In Rus.) 
22. Karasik, V. I. Cultural Dominants in Language / V. I. Ka-
rasik. — Text : unmediated // Language Circle: Personality, Con-
cepts, Discourse. — Volgograd : Change, 2002. — P. 166—205. 
[Kul'turnye dominanty v yazyke / V. I. Karasik. — Tekst : 
neposredstvennyy // Yazykovoy krug: lichnost', kontsepty, 
diskurs. — Volgograd : Peremena, 2002. — S. 166—205]. — 
(In Rus.) 
23. Korneychuk, B. V. Institutional Economics : textbook for uni-
versities / B. V. Korneychuk. — Moscow : Gardariki, 2007. — 
255 p. — Text : unmediated. [Institutsional'naya ekonomika : ucheb. 
pos. dlya vuzov / B. V. Korneychuk. — Moskva : Gardariki, 2007. — 
255 s. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — (In Rus.) 
24. Kosmodem'yanskaya, K. V. Power and the Media: Interac-
tion or Opposition? / K.V. Kosmodemyanskaya. — Text : unme-
diated // Theory and Practice of Social Development. — 2014. — 
No. 4. — P. 176—178. [Vlast' i SMI: vzaimodeystvie ili protivo-
stoyanie? / K. V. Kosmodem'yanskaya. — Tekst : neposredstven-
nyy // Teoriya i praktika obshchestvennogo razvitiya. — 2014. — 
№ 4. — S. 176—178]. — (In Rus.) 
Нестерова В. Е. Политическая лингвистика. 2021. № 5 (89). С. 128–138. 
136 
25. Parshina, O. N. Strategies and Tactics of Speech Behavior 
of the Modern Political Elite of Russia : abstract of Doctoral 
thesis … of Dr. of Philol. Sciences / O. N. Parshina. — Saratov, 
2005. — 48 p. — Text : unmediated. [Strategii i taktiki rechevogo 
povedeniya sovremennoy politicheskoy elity Rossii : avtoref. dis 
… d-ra filol. nauk / O. N. Parshina. — Saratov, 2005. — 48 s. — 
Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — (In Rus.) 
26. Perednya, D. G. The Image of Police Officers in Newspa-
pers and the Mass Consciousness of Russians / D. G. Pered-
nya. — Text : unmediated // Social Research. — 2016. — 
No. 2. — P. 32—42. [Obraz rabotnikov politsii v gazetakh i mas-
sovom soznanii rossiyan / D. G. Perednya. — Tekst : 
neposredstvennyy // Sotsial'nye issledovaniya. — 2016. — 
№ 2. — S. 32—42]. — (In Rus.) 
27. Pocheptsov, G. G. Theory and Practice of Communications : 
(From Speeches of the President to Negotiations with Terrorists) / 
G. G. Pocheptsov. — Moscow : Center, 1998. — 349 p. — Text : 
unmediated. [Teoriya i praktika kommunikatsiy: (Ot rechey 
prezidenta do peregovorov s terroristami) / G. G. Pocheptsov. — 
Moskva :Tsentr,1998. — 349 s. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — 
(In Rus.) 
28. P'yanov, A. I. Social Institution of the Family as a Structural 
and Value-normative Component of Society / A. I. P'yanov. — 
Text : unmediated // Historical, Philosophical, Political and Legal 
Sciences, Cultural Studies and Art History. Issues of Theory and 
Practice. — Tambov : Diploma, 2011. — No. 3 (9): in 3 parts. — 
Part I. — P. 160—168. [Sotsial'nyy institut sem'i kak strukturnyy 
i tsennostno-normativnyy komponent sotsiuma / A. I. P'yanov. — 
Tekst : neposredstvennyy // Istoricheskie, filosofskie, politiche-
skie i yuridicheskie nauki, kul'turologiya i iskusstvovedenie. Vop-
rosy teorii i praktiki. — Tambov : Gramota, 2011. — № 3 (9) : 
v 3 ch. — Ch. I. — C. 160—168]. — (In Rus.) 
29. Ruzhentseva, N. B. Discrediting Tactics and Techniques in 
Russian Political Discourse : monograph / N. B. Ruzhentseva ; 
Ural State Ped. Univ. — Ekaterinburg : [s. n.], 2004. — 294 p. — 
Text : unmediated. [Diskreditiruyushchie taktiki i priemy v 
rossiyskom politicheskom diskurse : monogr. / N. B. Ruzhentseva ; 
Ural. gos. ped. un-t. — Ekaterinburg : [b. i.], 2004. — 294 s. — 
Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — (In Rus.) 
30. Smelzer, N. Sociology / N. Smelzer. — Moscow, 1994. — 
659 p. — Text : unmediated. [Sotsiologiya / N. Smelzer. — 
Moskva, 1994. — 659 s. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy]. — 
(In Rus.) 
31. Khidekel', S. S. Evaluative Component of the Lexical Mean-
ing of a Word / S. S. Khidekel, G. G. Koshel. — Text : unmediat-
ed // Foreign Languages at School. — 1981. — No. 4. — P. 7—
10. [Otsenochnyy komponent leksicheskogo znacheniya slova / 
S. S. Khidekel', G. G. Koshel'. — Tekst : neposredstvennyy // 
Inostrannye yazyki v shkole. — 1981. — № 4. — S. 7—10]. — 
(In Rus.) 
32. Richard, R. J. What Influences Overall Citizen Satisfaction 
with the Police, 2015 / R. J. Richard. — URL: https://www.llrmi. 
com/articles/legal_update/2015_johnson_citizensatisfaction/. 
— 
Text : electronic. 
33. Schultz, J. Media Coverage of Law Enforcement and Effects 
of the Image Created / J. Schultz. — Text : electronic // Domini-
can University of California. — 2019. — URL: https://core.ac.uk/ 
download/pdf/215555071.pdf. 
34. Wayne, W. L. The Media Representations of Police Image: 
Research Notes on the Hong Kong’s Occupy Movement / 
W. L. Wayne. — Text : electronic // Sage Open Journal. — 
2015. — Vol. 5, 3. — URL: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10. 
1177/2158244015607935. 
В. Е. Нестерова 
Уральский юридический институт МВД России, Екатеринбург, Россия 
ORCID ID: 0000-0002-7467-0029  
 E-mail: karaelan@mail.ru. 
Вербализация компонента «жестокость» как часть лингвистического 
моделирования образа американской полиции в 
проправительственных и оппозиционных газетах 
АННОТАЦИЯ. Статья посвящена изучению процесса лингвистического моделирования образа социального 
института полиции США в проправительственных и оппозиционных газетах посредством вербализации компонен-
та «жестокость» в рамках стратегии оценочной аргументации. Стратегия оценочной аргументации является 
одной из наиболее эффективных стратегий моделирования образа социального института, в рамках которой адре-
сантом посредством апелляции к эмоциям адресата создается определенная модель, вербализованная в ценностных 
компонентах и способная оказывать речевое воздействие, формируя мнение и отношение адресата к тому тли 
иному объекту или явлению. Автором анализируются аргументативные акты, репрезентирующие деятельность 
правоохранительных органов США в таких проправительственных и оппозиционных газетах, как “Associated 
Press”, “Wall Street Journal”, “The Washington Post” и “The New York Times” за период с 6 по 20 января 2021 г. 
В результате анализа аргументативных актов, эксплицирующих компонент «жестокость», автор приходит к 
выводу, что стратегия оценочной аргументации в проправительственных и оппозиционных газетах реализуется 
различными способами, а речевые приемы кардинально отличаются друг от друга. Информационная политика про-
правительственных изданий “Associated Press” и “Wall Street Journal” характеризуется общим нейтральным то-
ном комментирования событий без употребления негативно-окрашенной лексики в адрес правоохранительных 
структур, которые представлены в виде профессионалов, выполняющих свой долг, пытающихся всеми средствами 
минимизировать количество возможных жертв, встающих на защиту жизни и здоровья граждан, а также охра-
няющих государственно-политические ценности — демократию, права и свободы человека. Оппозиционные газеты 
«The Washington Post» и «The New York Times» моделируют отрицательный образ социального института полиции 
посредством вербализации компонента «жестокость» в новостных сообщениях, в которых офицеры представлены 
врагами народа, разрушителями этических, культурных и исторических ценностей, лицами, превышающими свои 
должностные полномочия и нарушающими права и свободы граждан. 
КЛЮЧЕВЫЕ СЛОВА: журналистика; медиалингвистика; медиадискурс; медиатексты; СМИ; средства 
массовой информации; язык СМИ; политический дискурс; языковые средства; лингвистическое моделирование; 
жестокость; аргументативные акты; правоохранительные органы; американская полиция; оппозиционные газе-
ты; проправительственные газеты; речевое воздействие; категория. 
Nesterova V. E. Political Linguistics. 2021. No 5 (89). P. 128–138. 
137 
ИНФОРМАЦИЯ ОБ АВТОРЕ: Нестерова Валерия Евгеньевна, старший преподаватель кафедры иностран-
ных языков, Уральский юридический институт МВД России, Екатеринбург, Россия; 620057, Россия, г. Екатерин-
бург, ул. Корепина, 66; e-mail: karaelan@mail.ru. 
ДЛЯ ЦИТИРОВАНИЯ: Нестерова, В. Е. Вербализация компонента «жестокость» как часть лингвистического 
моделирования образа американской полиции в проправительственных и оппозиционных газетах (на англ. яз.) / 
В. Е. Нестерова // Политическая лингвистика. — 2021. — № 5 (89). — С. 128-138. — DOI 10.26170/1999-
2629_2021_05_15. 
