ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 4 (56). Межкультурная коммуникация и обучение иностран-
ным языкам. Актуальные проблемы образования 
 
123 
УДК 378.1 
DOI 10.47388/2072-3490/lunn2021-56-4-123-130 
 
MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION AND ITS ESSENTIAL ROLE  
IN PROFESSIONAL TRAINING OF UNIVERSITY STUDENTS 
 
Victor T. Malygin, Natalia A. Naumova 
 
The Vladimir Branch of Financial University under the Government of the  
Russian Federation, Vladimir, Russia 
 
The article focuses on multicultural education as the key factor in professional training of 
university students. The authors examine the Russian educational system, which is based on 
the national educational standard and shapes the content of education in accordance with the 
structure of the Russian national identity, seeking to preserve and disseminate the ethno-
cultural heritage and national cultures throughout Russia and beyond. The article looks at the 
foundational concepts of education and culture and examines the nature, principles, and ob-
jectives of multicultural education which have emerged as a result of the new paradigm in the 
system of professional training in response to the new challenges of the modern time and the 
ideas of the Bologna process promoted by leading European universities. The research meth-
ods include monitoring, interviews, and content analysis. The outcomes of the study show that 
all levels of Russian education should be represented in the system of multicultural education, 
including preschool, elementary school (grades 1–4), general secondary school (grades 5–9), 
full secondary school (grades 10–11) as well as other institutions of secondary, higher, and 
continuous education. The main principles of multicultural education are the national and cul-
tural basis of education, humanist transparency, and learner-centered approaches. The main 
objective of multicultural education is the building-up of competencies that contribute to the 
successful all-round development of an individual in a multiethnic society. The article re-
views the experimental research conducted by the scholars of the Vladimir branch of the Fi-
nancial University under the Government of the Russian Federation and its practical out-
comes, which further prove that comprehensive interaction of traditional and innovative 
teaching methods and approaches in professional training and individual development is only 
possible within the balanced framework of monocultural and multicultural formats of higher 
education. The outcomes of the research are used in organizing the educational process in the 
Vladimir branch of the Financial University and recommended for implementation in other 
institutions of higher education, since the interaction between traditions and innovations with-
in the global education highlights the main function of multicultural education: turning out 
modern professionals who are ready to face the challenges of real life and work in the global-
izing society. 
Key words: multicultural education; vocational training and learning; individual and cultural 
self-determination; dialogue of cultures; global educational space. 
 
 
 
 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 4 (56). Межкультурная коммуникация и обучение иностран-
ным языкам. Актуальные проблемы образования 
 
124 
Поликультурное образование и его роль в воспитании и обучении студентов вуза 
 
В. Т. Малыгин, Н. А. Наумова 
Владимирский филиал Финансового университета при Правительстве Российской  
Федерации, Владимир, Россия 
 
Статья посвящена вопросу поликультурного образования как важнейшему фактору в 
воспитании и обучении студентов высшей школы. Цель исследования состоит в изуче-
нии образовательной системы, которая в рамках единого государственного образова-
тельного стандарта формирует содержание обучения и воспитания в соответствии со 
структурой российской идентичности, руководствуясь целями трансляции этнокуль-
турного наследия и национальных культур народов России в широком контексте рос-
сийской и мировой цивилизации. Предмет исследования включает понятия образова-
ния и культуры. В исследовании раскрываются сущность, основные принципы, цели и 
задачи поликультурного образования, появившегося в результате развития новой пара-
дигмы высшего профессионального образования в ответ на вызовы времени и все более 
глубокого проникновения идеи Болонского процесса в совершенствование деятельно-
сти европейских вузов. Методы исследования включают наблюдение, опрос и контент-
анализ. В результате исследования было выявлено, что в системе поликультурного об-
разования должны быть представлены все уровни российского образования: учрежде-
ния дошкольного образования, начального (1–4 классы), основного общего (5–9 клас-
сы), полного общего (10–11 классы), учреждения среднего, высшего и дополнительного 
образования. Основными принципами поликультурного воспитания являются нацио-
нально-культурная основа воспитания, гуманистическая открытость и личностная ори-
ентированность. Ведущей целью поликультурного образования признаётся формирова-
ние компетенций, способствующих успешному всестороннему развитию личности в 
полиэтническом обществе. В статье приводятся результаты экспериментального проек-
та на базе Владимирского филиала Финансового университета при Правительстве Рос-
сийской Федерации и его практические результаты, подтверждающие комплексное 
взаимодействие традиционных и инновационных средств обучения и воспитания, обес-
печивающих равномерное развитие личности только в условиях баланса между моно-
культурным и поликультурным форматом вуза. Полученные результаты имеют практи-
ческое применение при организации учебно-воспитательного процесса во Владимир-
ском филиале Финуниверситета. Рекомендуется учитывать опыт внедрения результатов 
исследования при работе со студентами высших учебных заведений, поскольку взаимо-
связь традиций и инноваций позволяет определить основную функцию поликультурно-
го образования, ориентирующего выпускников высших учебных заведений на жизнь и 
трудовую деятельность в реальном глобализирующемся мире. 
Ключевые слова: поликультурное образование; профессиональное образование и обу-
чение; индивидуальное и культурное самоопределение; диалог культур; глобальное об-
разовательное пространство. 
 
1. Introduction 
The ideas and practices of multicultural education, propelled to the fore-
ground by the challenges of preparing younger generations for life in a multina-
tional and multicultural environment, grew particularly relevant in 1990s, when 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 4 (56). Межкультурная коммуникация и обучение иностран-
ным языкам. Актуальные проблемы образования 
 
125 
intensive integration processes and the desire of Russia to become part of the 
European and global socio-cultural and educational space while preserving its 
national identity became important socio-political determinants of multicultural 
education. Age-old psychological oppositions “friend – stranger” and “I – not  
I” continue to prevent people from living and working in multi-ethnic environ-
ments, and it’s not a surprise that problems of multicultural education are at-
tracting more and more teachers, psychologists, and politicians globally. In to-
day’s society we desperately need to learn the art of living with people who are 
different from us. 
The foundation for multicultural education is provided by a number of 
Russian and foreign traditions in philosophy, pedagogics, and psychology. The 
concept of multicultural education emerged in the West in the 1970s, but its 
roots go much farther back, to the Enlightenment and earlier. The ideas of mul-
ticulturalism could be seen in the works by A. Diesterweg and J. Pestalozzi and 
certainly in“The Pampaedia” by J. Comenius, where the great Czech teacher 
proposed a system for developing a holistic and mature identity in a society 
where all individuals should possess encyclopedic knowledge: essentially a uni-
versal education program for the entire human race. Moreover, the formation of 
children’s ability to live in peace with others, fulfill mutual obligations, and re-
spect and love other people was a significant part of his original program. Later, 
N. Roerich wrote about the beneficial synthesis as a unity of cultures, seeing in 
this a beneficial cooperation of people of different nationalities. L. Vygotsky 
drew some important conclusions about multicultural education within the 
framework of the cultural-historical theory of behavior and psyche. According 
to this theory, the sources and determinants of mental and emotional develop-
ment lie in a historically developing culture. Ideas and conclusions about multi-
cultural education, even though some of them utilize different language and 
concepts, can be found in the works by renown Russian educators A. Makaren-
ko, V. Sukhomlinsky, and K. Ushinsky (Кolobova 2006).  
In a globalizing world, the problem of multicultural education is becom-
ing increasingly important. The contemporary society gives us every incentive 
to seek and find new paradigms for providing a better training for students in in-
stitutions of higher education, especially if we take into account the challenges 
of our time and the ever deeper and more comprehensive implementation of the 
ideas of the Bologna process in European universities. 
The official Framework for the Development of Multicultural Education, 
developed in accordance with the National Doctrine of Education of the Russian 
Federation, sees multicultural education as an educational system which is part 
of the integrated federal educational standard and which defines the content of 
training and education in terms of shaping the Russian national identity. One of 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 4 (56). Межкультурная коммуникация и обучение иностран-
ным языкам. Актуальные проблемы образования 
 
126 
its central goals is to preserve and disseminate the ethno-cultural heritage and 
national cultures throughout Russia and beyond. It must be noted, though, that 
the development of multicultural education in Russia can only have the desired 
impact if it goes along with the overall development of the national educational 
system, which continues to actively seek for new ideas and methods for training 
the younger generation and now faces the challenges of an entirely new set of 
ethical, psychological, social, political, and economic goals. Peace and social 
stability are only possible if the ongoing modernization of the Russian education 
system remains in agreement with the general trends of global development. 
 
2. Material and Methods 
The multicultural education system includes all levels of Russian educa-
tion: pre-school, elementary school (grades 1–4), general secondary school 
(grades 5–9), full secondary school (grades 10–11) as well as other institutions 
of secondary, higher, and continuous education. Before focusing on the nature, 
principles, goals, and objectives of multicultural education, it is highly important 
to clarify the definition of two key concepts: the concept of education and the 
concept of culture. 
Based on the existing variety of definitions of “education,” we propose 
the following working definition of the concept in its broad sense: Education is 
a relatively independent, multi-faceted, open, pedagogically and psychologically 
verified system of various methods of a person’s socialization with the main 
purpose to educate and train both the individual and the society in the process of 
active and successful development of the cultural heritage of the mankind. It is 
just as important to clarify the definition of such a complex philosophical con-
cept as “culture.” In Russian and foreign literature there are over 500 different 
definitions of this phenomenon, and most of them are based on the notion that 
culture is a constantly improving mechanism for the development of creative ac-
tivities which transform both humanity and the world. Every man-made object 
that exists on Earth is the result of an individual person’s life and creative work, 
both physical and non-material. Definitions emerge from the origin of the word 
“culture”: based on the Latin “cultura,” it stands for cultivation, processing; up-
bringing, education, development, veneration and worship. 
In considering the basic essential characteristics of multicultural educa-
tion, it is important to note that, first of all, multicultural education should in-
clude the study of the national culture and its traditions. Furthermore, if we take 
into consideration the growing number of foreign students in Russian universi-
ties, it spells out the need for the development of bicultural education of foreign 
students from Russian minority language groups as well as young people from 
European and Asian countries. 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 4 (56). Межкультурная коммуникация и обучение иностран-
ным языкам. Актуальные проблемы образования 
 
127 
Moreover, pedagogy has a great importance in multicultural education. It 
takes into account and develops the following important pedagogical principles: 
1) human dignity; 2) high moral principles, and 3) tolerance and readiness for 
mutual cooperation with people of other nationalities. All this requires a close 
collaboration of psychologists, the faculty involved in teaching the disciplines 
included in university curricula, as well as the faculty and staff engaged in con-
ducting extracurricular activities, since all these can and should contribute to the 
formation of young people’s ideas about the diversity of national cultures and 
their importance for individual self-realization and self-fulfillment. 
The main principles of multicultural education are the national and cultur-
al basis of education, humanist transparency, and learner-centered approaches. 
The goals and objectives of multicultural education are to educate students in the 
spirit of pluralism, equality, and unity (Dzhurinskiy 2002: 13–14), producing in-
dividuals who are able to lead a proactive and effective life in multicultural en-
vironments, participating in peaceful collaborative activities with people of dif-
ferent nationalities, races, and beliefs (Маkaev, Mal’kova, Suprunova 1999: 6). 
With the support of schools and other educational institutions, families, and pub-
lic organizations, multicultural education aims to promote and develop Russia as 
a democratic state, which practices tolerance of people’s views and judgments, 
recognizes and develops cultural pluralism in the society, and respects individu-
als’ right to free choice regarding their own cultural identity (Dmitriyev 1999: 
34). 
The main objective of multicultural education is the building-up of com-
petencies that contribute to the successful all-round development of an individu-
al in a multiethnic society. Reviewing and summing up existing literature on the 
subject, I. Bessarabova identifies the following main outcomes of multicultural 
education within the framework of higher education:  
– a deep and comprehensive mastery of the national culture 
– students’ diversity-friendly attitude to global cultures 
– development of skills for effective interaction with representatives of 
different cultures 
– educating students in the spirit of peace, tolerance and humane inter-
ethnic communication 
– development of students’ ability for individual and cultural self-
determination (Bessarabova 2008: 98). 
Since the main source and foundation of multicultural education is found 
in the national and global cultural heritage in its overall and universal diversity, 
discussions of both historically accumulated and current achievements in natural 
sciences and humanities in the local, national, and global context could be a po-
tentially powerful tool in modern multicultural university education. Thus over-
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 4 (56). Межкультурная коммуникация и обучение иностран-
ным языкам. Актуальные проблемы образования 
 
128 
all university curricula and programs for specific disciplines should focus on in-
terdisciplinary connections as well as take into account the interests of future 
employers, providing students with theoretical knowledge in conjunction with 
its practical application. 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
In 2014–2020, the faculty of the Vladimir branch of the Financial Univer-
sity under the Government of the Russian Federation carried out empirical re-
search seeking to see how comprehensive use of traditional and innovative 
teaching methods could provide an important synergetic effect for maintaining 
psychological health and boosting individual students’ intellectual and cultural 
development. The experiment included pedagogical follow-up, psychological 
screening, and a multi-level individual survey “Adaptability,” conducted among 
undergraduates enrolled in Bachelor’s programs in Economics (Yudina, 
Naumova 2019). Further annual psychological monitoring, using the standard-
ized methods and techniques as well as socio-psychological and psychological 
testing, was provided at the end of the study with the goal to observe the chang-
es in students’ personal attitudes and individual motivation at the end of the first 
semester of each academic year. The outcomes of this monitoring helped to 
evaluate the following: 1) development and changes in students’ individual psy-
chological attitudes; 2) changes in motivational objectives, learning purposes, 
and views on professional work in the field of economics; 3) nature of personal 
relationships within academic groups (smaller groups within a class): overall at-
titudes and issues, group unity, and team spirit; and 4) likelihood of addictive 
behaviors.  
It may be concluded that the innovative system of pedagogical follow-up 
for students, based on systematic development of students’ personal creative po-
tential, student team initiatives, students’ growing social and cultural adaptabil-
ity due to group visits to theaters, exhibitions, live music concerts etc., has prov-
en itself to be effective in comparison with more traditional interactions with the 
faculty, as the results of the comparative analysis demonstrate positive outputs. 
The statistics show a 12 % increase of the neuro-psychiatric stability, a 18 % in-
crease of communicative skills, a 30 % increase in adhering to moral principles, 
and a 20 % growth of the common indicator of the individual adaptation poten-
tial among undergraduates (Doroshenko, Zharkova, Naumova 2020a, 2020b; 
Malygin, Levina, Naumova 2020). 
Organizationally, teaching students in multicultural modes can be success-
fully built on traditional methods and forms that have already proven their effec-
tiveness: lectures, personal stories, conversations, dialogues, discussions, role-
plays, debates, round tables, etc. According to Y. Lotman, dialogue as an act of 
ВЕСТНИК НГЛУ. Выпуск 4 (56). Межкультурная коммуникация и обучение иностран-
ным языкам. Актуальные проблемы образования 
 
129 
communication between cultures and a universal law of cultural development 
plays a particularly important role in the development of students’ communica-
tion skills in a multicultural educational space (Siraeva 2008: 30). In fact, the 
whole process of teaching and character education is based on a continuous dia-
logue between the teacher and the learner, which tends to be an essential ele-
ment of the so-called interactive learning and makes it possible to promote in-
terdisciplinary cooperation within the pedagogical process, enabling students to 
listen and hear the interlocutor, to analyze the situation, to argue and resolve 
contradictions, and to find consensus and compromise.  
Further experience of interpersonal and interethnic communication among 
students can be achieved through extra-curricular activities. These are various 
forms of social work, creative clubs, celebrations and meetings, including 
Freshman Convocation and Senior Graduation ceremonies, tours, field trips, in-
ternational parties, days of national cultures and literature, days of national cui-
sine, costumes, and customs, foreign language days and international meetings, 
educational panel games, intellectual and creative competitions, theater perfor-
mances, national and ethnic festivals. In view of the current challenges of multi-
cultural education, these and many other types of such culture and diversity-
promoting events and activities are of great and growing importance. 
 
4. Conclusion 
The success of multicultural education in our time is likely to become one 
of the main criteria for evaluating the work of higher education institutions since 
their primary purpose is to produce graduates who are ready to face real life and 
work in a multicultural world. Consequently, creating multicultural educational 
environments in universities is one of the most important and urgent challenges 
within the general framework of the higher education in Russia. 
 
