Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
65
Petrova O.V., Sdobnikov V.V., 2021
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА

www.volsu.ru
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.6
UDC 81’25:378
Submitted: 09.12.2020
LBC 81.18
Accepted: 30.03.2021
A TRANSLATION TEACHER PROFILE IN THE RUSSIAN CONTEXT 1
Olga V. Petrova
Linguistics University of Nizhny Novgorod, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia
Vadim V. Sdobnikov
Linguistics University of Nizhny Novgorod, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia
Abstract. The paper discusses the results of a survey of a translation teacher profile in the context of Russian
academia. It reveals that there is no integral profile of a translation teacher in Russia today. Translation teachers can
be categorized into certain groups according to their initial training, practical experience in translation and age. The
survey shows that a significant number of translation teachers have had no translation training. Regardless of their
initial training, almost all translation teachers are engaged in practical translation, however only few of them
perform translation or interpreting on a regular basis. Among those who teach Translation Theory there are some
who have never been taught it, thus they may be regarded as self-educated theorists. Virtually no translation
trainers in Russian universities have ever been professionally educated in translation didactics. 75% of the total
number of translation teachers have completed short-time advanced training courses, which does not seem to be
sufficient to become an experienced translation teacher. A large number of those who do have initial translation
training teach translation copying their own teachers. It is doubtful that all of them possess translation mode of
thinking and are able to develop it in their students. The overall conclusion is that a comprehensive system for
training and retraining translation teachers is required.
Key words: translation teacher, translation teacher competence, translation training, translation didactics,
Translation Theory.
Citation. Petrova O.V., Sdobnikov V.V. A Translation Teacher Profile in the Russian Context. Vestnik
Volgogradskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2. Yazykoznanie [Science  Journal  of  Volgograd  State
University. Linguistics], 2021, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 65-74. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.6
УДК 81’25:378
Дата поступления статьи: 09.12.2020
ББК 81.18
Дата принятия статьи: 30.03.2021
ПОРТРЕТ ПРЕПОДАВАТЕЛЯ ПЕРЕВОДА В РОССИЙСКИХ ВУЗАХ 1
Ольга Владимировна Петрова
Нижегородский государственный лингвистический университет им. Н.А. Добролюбова,
г. Нижний Новгород, Россия
Вадим Витальевич Сдобников
Нижегородский государственный лингвистический университет им. Н.А. Добролюбова,
г. Нижний Новгород, Россия
Аннотация. В статье представлены результаты изучения профиля преподавателя перевода в российской
высшей школе. Показано, что сегодня в России не существует единого целостного портрета преподавателя
перевода. На основании проведенного авторами опроса, в котором учитывалось базовое образование, опыт
работы переводчиком и возраст, выделены несколько категорий преподавателей. Установлено, что значитель-
ная часть респондентов не имеет специального переводческого образования; вне зависимости от базового
образования большинство преподавателей перевода осуществляют практическую переводческую деятельность,
66
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
однако незначительное их количество делают это на постоянной основе. Обнаружено, что среди российских препо-
давателей теории перевода есть такие, которые не изучали эту дисциплину в вузе, а осваивали самостоятельно.
Выявлено, что большинство опрошенных не получили профессиональной подготовки в области дидактики перево-
да, три четверти от общего количества опрошенных обучались на краткосрочных курсах повышения квалификации,
чего явно недостаточно для того, чтобы стать опытным преподавателем перевода. Значительное число тех, кто
получил базовое переводческое образование, преподают перевод, опираясь на устаревшие методики, что не позво-
ляет сформировать у студентов современное переводческое мышление. Полученные результаты свидетельствуют о
необходимости создания комплексной системы подготовки и переподготовки преподавателей перевода.
Ключевые слова: преподаватель перевода, компетенция преподавателя перевода, обучение переводу,
дидактика перевода, теория перевода.
Цитирование. Петрова О. В., Сдобников В. В. Портрет преподавателя перевода в российских вузах
// Вестник Волгоградского государственного университета. Серия 2, Языкознание. – 2021. – Т. 20, № 3. –
С. 65–74. – (На англ. яз.). – DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.3.6
Introduction
Training translators has been conducted in
Russian universities for approximately ninety
years already. In the Soviet Union it was confined
to a small number of academic institutions that
specialized in training translators / interpreters to
meet the needs of the Army and government
agencies. The situation changed upon the collapse
of the Soviet Union, with the transfer to the market
economy, dramatic expansion of foreign trade and
development of relations not only on the
government-to-government but also on the
business-to-business level. It became obvious that
various domains required a great number of
qualified translators and interpreters able to satisfy
their needs. In the 1990s, the challenge was
quickly responded to by many Russian universities
which began to offer bachelor-equivalent and
master-equivalent programs in translation and
interpreting. The expansion of the academic
training of translators resulted in the pressing need
of competent translation teachers who might be
able to design translation courses, to develop
translation skills in their students and to transfer
their knowledge of translation to them.
And here a question arises: where did those
translation teachers come from? It is obvious that
those who joined this noble profession had never
been taught how to teach translation. We know
that only few of them had had some translation
training at universities and gained appropriate
experience in the field. Apparently, it was those
few who were best prepared to fulfill the mission
of training novice translators and interpreters, at
least due to the fact that they had already acquired
the knowledge of how translation can be taught in
the course of their own studies. This view is shared
by Roberto Mayoral who argues that “the best way
to learn how to teach translation is to study the
way good teachers teach, and then enrich that with
one’s own innovations” [Mayoral, 2003, p. 5].
Michael Gove as cited by J. Orchard and
Ch. Winch metaphorically compares teaching with
a craft: “Teaching is a craft and it is best learnt as
an apprentice observing a master craftsman or
woman. Watching others, and being rigorously
observed yourself as you develop, is the best route
to acquiring mastery in the classroom” [Orchard,
Winch, 2015, p. 12]. Indeed, in the 1990s, it seemed
to be the only reliable way to become a translation
teacher. Being reliable and based on common sense,
the method still lacks some training which is
essential for those who are engaged in teaching
translation and which we shall mention below.
The academic landscape has changed in
Russia, and those who have joined the profession
of translation teacher differ from one another in
terms of their initial training, qualification, translation
and teaching experience. Thus, the categorization
of translation teachers is possible and most probable
in order to outline a translation teacher profile
(or profiles, as the case may be), which constitutes
the aim of this article. With this aim in view, a
questionnaire has been distributed among translation
teachers of Russian universities, and results of the
inquiry will be dwelt upon below.
Translation teacher competences
In order to solve the task, it is necessary, first
and foremost, to determine what requirements a
translation teacher must meet. In other words, what
competencies (s)he should possess.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
67
O.V. Petrova, V.V. Sdobnikov. A Translation Teacher Profile in the Russian Context
Some scholars believe that “whereas the term
‘competence’ is largely used in many disciplines and
contexts, it is difficult to find a definition that
reconciles all different ways in which it is used”
[Esfandiari, Shokrpour, Rahimi, 2019, p. 1].
Translation Studies (TS) literature is also abundant
in definitions of a competence. We believe that
F. Lasnier’s definition is one of the most
comprehensive: “A competence is a complex know-
how to act resulting from integration, mobilization
and organization of a combination of capabilities and
skills (which can be cognitive, affective, psycho-
motor or social) and knowledge (declarative
knowledge) used efficiently in situations with
common characteristics” [Lasnier, 2000, p. 24]. This
broad notion of competence must be made more
specific in relation to training the trainers.
It has become a good tradition to refer to
Dorothy Kelly who has offered a list of translation
teacher competences which includes: 1) profession
translation practice; 2) Translation Studies as an
academic discipline; 3) teaching skills [Kelly, 2005,
p. 151]. The latter is subdivided into
“subcompetences” or areas of competence:
organizational (i.e., the ability to design courses
and appropriate teaching and learning activities);
interpersonal (i.e., the ability to work
collaboratively with trainees towards their learning
goals); instructional (i.e., the ability to present
content and explain clearly); contextual or
professional (i.e., understanding of the
educational context in which training takes place)
[Kelly, 2005, p. 151]. Kelly believes that the first
two competences “constitute prerequisites rather
than the central competence we are interested
in”, and presents the third one as the most essential
[Kelly, 2005, p. 151]. Yet, be it prerequisites or
core requirements, the first two competences are
of paramount importance, especially in the
Russian context. We shall note, in passing, that
the same requirements are formulated by D. Li
and Ch. Zhang who termed them as “knowledge
of teaching”, “knowledge of research” and
“knowledge of the trade”. The latter encompasses
translating abilities and the knowledge of the
profession, including familiarity with the market
and the technology [Li, Zhang, 2011, p. 697].
The fact is that the question whether a
translation teacher should have experience in
translation is still unresolved in Russia. To be more
exact, many educators as well as many
practitioners who are not indifferent to what is
going on in academia and in the professional field
insist that to be experienced in practical
translation / interpreting is a must for a translation
teacher. At the same time, educational authorities
pretend not to hear the claims because they need
to provide for training a sufficient number of
translators; so they do it by recruiting any
specialists who have at least command of a
foreign language and, as the case may be, some
experience in teaching a foreign language.
This situation contradicts the principles
voiced in the TS literature and insisted upon by
many scholars. In particular, members of the EMT
Expert Group mention a Field Competence as the
one which is indispensable for a translation
teacher / trainer (together with Instructional
Competence, Organizational Competence,
Interpersonal Competence and Assessment
Competence) (EMT). A Field Competence is
eloquently defined as the “ability to perform any
task assigned to the students according to the
quality standards required in professional
practice” (EMT) and breaks down into two sub-
categories: 1) knowledge of the professional
field including translation-related professions;
constraints of translation projects (e.g. time /
budget / qualities); domains of specialization in
translation-related 
professions; 
market
requirements; operating procedures and tools used
in professional translation; foreseeable
development of the professions; 2) translation-
service provision competence including
knowledge of the existing standards and
specifications; ability to critically analyze these
standards and specifications; ability to perform
the tasks and sub-tasks involved in the translation-
service provision (including planning, preparing the
material for translation, quality assurance,
document management, terminology management,
etc.) (EMT).
The vision of a translation teacher being a
practitioner is also upheld by Marta Roses as cited
by Defeng Li and Chunling Zhang [Li, Zhang,
2011, p. 696] when she writes that “since one of
the main tasks of the social constructivist teacher
is to represent the community in which the
apprentices wish to take part, translator trainers
should be active translators or, at least, have ample
professional experience in the area. This way, it
will also be easier to take real projects to the
68
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
classroom (with the clients’ approval) or help
students get such projects, enabling them to do
just what professionals do: translate real texts, for
real clients and real readers / users”. We can add
a number of arguments to support the idea that a
teacher must be able to do what (s)he teaches.
But it is hardly necessary to do so since the idea
seems to be self-evident. Moreover, in Russian
and Western Translation Studies it is deeply rooted
in the views of the precursors of the science of
translating. Suffice it to recall Peter Newmark’s
definition of translation teacher’s professional
qualities that can be seen as comprising of
“translator’s skills” on the one hand, and teaching
skills on the other [Newmark, 1991, p. 131]. Vilen
Komissarov also argues that translation must be
taught only by a person who is an experienced
translator themself, who has professional
competences, who knows the translation activity
“from within”, who is familiar with the challenges,
possibilities and conditions of the translator’s work.
Komissarov states straightforwardly that “not
every practitioner is able to teach translation
successfully but every translation teacher must
be able to translate professionally (translation
mine. – V. S.)” [Komissarov, 2001, pp. 340-341].
Donald Kiraly is no less straightforward in his
statement that “it cannot be expected that
language instructors without professional
translation expertise will have a professional
translator self-concept themselves or that they will
be able to help their translation students develop
one” [Kiraly, 1995, p. 3]. It is only regrettable that
this idea, so simple and transparent, is not fully
understood by the Russian academic community.
However, Kelly justly states that
“professional experience as a translator is simply
not sufficient to become a professional translation
teacher” [Kelly, 2008, p. 102]. As was stated
above, the list of translation teacher competences
outlined by Kelly includes such item as Translation
Studies as an academic discipline. It implies that
a translation teacher, first, must have some
knowledge of Translation Studies, and second,
must be engaged in scientific research. Other
scholars insist that a translation teacher should
also possess deep knowledge of General
Linguistics. For example, Komissarov argues that
a translation teacher “must know linguistic and
translation aspects of his or her course both
practically and theoretically, must have
comprehensive knowledge in the fields of
Language Theory and Translation Theory.
Analyzing the content and stylistic peculiarities
of the source text, comparing various versions of
translation with the ST, explaining errors in
translations to his / her students, the teacher uses
analysis methods and terminology of semaciology,
lexicology, grammar and other linguistic disciplines
(translation mine. – V. S.)” [Komissarov, 2001,
pp. 342-343]. Both Linguistics and Translation
Theory help a translation teacher make his / her
arguments convincing enough. Yet, it is clear that
the knowledge of Translation Studies constitutes
an integral and indispensible part of a translation
teacher’s theoretical background, one of the core
components of his / her competence. As Dmitry
Shlepnev has put it, “a translation teacher needs
a well-articulated theory that (s)he can use as a
basis, a background for their explanations to
students. If it is the case, (s)he will not beat about
the bush in his / her speculations about translation
and his / her work in class will be more effective
(translation mine. – V. S.)” [Shlepnev, Sdobnikov,
2007, p. 105].
It is well known that the university faculty
is often required to conduct scientific research.
In this respect, the situation in Russia differs little
from the situation abroad. Kelly writes that “most
university systems expect full-time lecturers to
be quite heavily involved in research, and
promotion and incentive schemes are usually based
on reward for dedication to, and achievements in,
research, whereas teaching and achievements in
teaching tend inevitably to play second fiddle”
[Kelly, 2008, p. 100]. The requirement to be
involved in research does not cause much concern,
provided the research is done in the field of
Translation Studies and not only in purely linguistic
disciplines. Concern is caused by the fact that
within Translation Studies, both in Russia and
abroad, there exist various concepts, theories and
approaches that not only differ from one another
but often contradict one another. It follows that a
translation teacher is expected to stick to a certain
Translation Theory among the multitude of
theories, to a specific system of views concerning
translation activity. It is clear that any translation
course must be aimed at the indoctrination of the
correct attitude of students towards translation
as an activity. The course should result in the
students’ comprehension of the laws and essence
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
69
O.V. Petrova, V.V. Sdobnikov. A Translation Teacher Profile in the Russian Context
of translation, of the tasks (not considered in terms
of methods of translation or achieving equivalence
at a certain level) a translator solves in each
translation act [Shlepnev, Sdobnikov, 2007, p. 107].
But to make it happen, a translation teacher
themself should have the correct attitude towards
translation, and this attitude must be based on the
correct Translation Theory. Based on our
observations, we can state that, regretfully, many
translation teachers in Russia have an eclectic
mix of early theories of translation (mainly, purely
linguistic theory underpinned by equivalence as
its core notion), provisions of the theory of
intercultural communication and a rough idea of
real translation activity in their minds, instead of
the correct and systematized theory based on the
functionalist approach to translation.
There is no doubt that a translation teacher
should possess teaching skills. As was stated
above, Kelly views them as the central
competence. We are disinclined to build a
hierarchy of translation teacher competences as
we believe that all of them are equally important:
if a teacher lacks one of them his / her activity in
the classroom is unlikely to produce the desired
effect. The same is true about the teaching skills.
In their review of the literature devoted to
translation teacher competences Nataša Pavlović
and Goranka Antunović mention a number of
works that stress the importance of teaching skills
[Pavlović, Antunović, 2019]. But a question arises:
how, when and where can translation teachers
acquire those skills? There are no university
programs of training professional translation
teachers in Russia. We know about some attempts
to introduce such programs in Russian universities
but they were not a success due to the lack of
interest and low motivation among bachelors to
get involved in teaching translation. Does it mean
that Roberto Mayoral cited above is right when
he states that “the best way to learn how to teach
translation is to study the way good teachers
teach” [Mayoral, 2003, p. 5]?
So, the topical issue is “What does a
translation teacher need to do to become good at
teaching translation?” Daniel Gouadec is more
specific than Mayoral in his consideration of the
ways of acquiring necessary competences by
translation teachers. He writes that “teachers on
a translator-training program should spend one
month in all three of the following situations:
1. Working in a translation firm (either as a
translator or a reviser or a terminologist).
2. Working in an in-house translation service
(same as above).
3. Being a freelance professional.
That should be enough for a start. And that
should clearly decide on their teaching
approaches” [Gouadec, 2003, p. 13].
We believe it is perhaps excessively
optimistic to expect a person to become a good
translation teacher after working in the three
situations specified by Gouadec for a total of three
months. It will not be enough even for a start.
True, it can provide some knowledge of the field
(or trade). But it can hardly equip a teacher with
an appropriate teaching approach. Suffice it to
recall that even well-experienced practitioners are
not always good translation teachers (when they
teach translation part-time or even full-time).
They lack a lot of necessary qualities which can
be obtained only in the academic environment.
Thus, we are impelled to conclude that Gouadec,
again, is excessively optimistic and non-specific
when he answers the question “Who should train
translators?”: “The answer to who should train
translators is quite straightforward: both
professionals with a talent for teaching and
teachers with a good knowledge of the job (not a
collection of subject matters) that they are
supposed to train people for” [Gouadec, 2003,
p. 13]. The notion of “talent for teaching” is too
vague to apply it to an individual. The knowledge
of the job is hard to be measured.
From the above it follows that so far
provisions of Translation Studies and even the
best practices of universities in Russia and
abroad cannot form the basis for any
recommendations as to how translation teachers
should be trained. Apparently, there can be
different paths to the profession of teaching
translation. Having walked a certain path to the
profession, each teacher brings their own wealth
of knowledge, expertise and experience to the
classroom, which implies that what a translation
teacher knows and can do inevitably influences
his / her teaching approach. That is why our
study includes review of 118 Russian translation
teacher’s backgrounds in the form of a
questionnaire which, as we hope, can help
outline a translation teacher’s profile or various
profiles.
70
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
The Survey Results
So what is the current situation as revealed
by the survey?
Out of the 118 translation teachers 64 (54.2%)
have a degree in translation (T group) and 54
(45.8%) have diplomas of foreign language
teachers, linguists, philologists or specialists in cross-
cultural communication (Non-T group).
Almost all respondents have completed
advanced training courses, with only less than 1%
stating that they have attended no professional
development programs and teach on the basis of
their university education and personal experience
as translator. However only 11 persons (9.3%)
have been retrained as teachers of translation.
29 respondents (24.6%) have completed
advanced training courses in translation:
18 respondents in the T-group and 11 in the Non-
T group. The majority (75.4%) have completed
short-time advanced training courses. The figures
do not sum up correctly because several
respondents in both groups went through two and
one person even through 3 courses.
According to comments made by some
respondents, short-time advanced training courses
are not always perceived as targeted specifically
at teaching translation. Having positively
answered the question about completing such a
program a person says they have never
undergone any professional training as a translation
teacher.
The breakdown by age groups shows that
11 respondents (9.3%) are people under 30; 39
(33.1%) between the ages of 30 and 40; 25
(21.2%) between 40 and 50; 27 (22.9%) between
50 and 60 and 16 (13.6%) are over 60. However
the picture within the T group and Non-T group
is not uniform (Table 1).
While the percentage of people having a
degree in translation is the highest in the age group
between 30 and 40 and then gradually decreases
to the minimum of slightly over 6% in the senior
group, in the Non-T group the highest figure is in
the age group between 50 and 60 years with quite
a high result for the people over 60 (22.2%). It is
also noteworthy that the number of young people
(those under 30) is more than twice as high among
teachers with a degree in translation as it is in the
other group.
The result can be interpreted in two ways.
First, it shows that the majority of  “the old guard”
among translation trainers are people with no
degree in translation. Besides, it reflects a
tendency for recent graduates to choose the field
of work coinciding with the field in which they
have a degree (or probably a tendency for the
employers to give preference to such graduates).
The analysis of the distribution according to
teaching experience and experience in practical
translation / interpreting has not revealed any direct
correlation. Neither has it shown any dependence
of practical experience in translation / interpreting
on the age (see Table 2 and 3).
Table 1. Age groups
Age 
(years) 
General result 
T group 
Non-T group 
Respondents 
% 
Respondents 
% 
Respondents 
% 
22–30 
  11 
  9.3 
  8 
12.5 
  3 
  5.5 
30–40 
  39 
33.1 
25 
39.1 
14 
25.9 
40–50 
  25 
21.2 
15 
23.4 
10 
18.5 
50–60 
  27 
22.8 
12 
18.7 
15 
27.8 
Over 60 
  16 
13.6 
  4 
  6.3 
12 
22.3 
Total 
118 
100 
64 
100 
54 
100 
 
Table 2. Teaching experience
Teaching 
experience 
(years) 
General result 
T group 
Non-T group 
Respondents 
% 
Respondents 
% 
Respondents 
% 
Less than 5 
  7 
  5.9 
  7 
10.9 
– 
– 
5-10 
19 
16.1 
13 
20.3 
  6 
11.2 
10-20 
38 
32.2 
20 
31.3 
18 
33.3 
20-30 
32 
27.2 
16 
25.0 
16 
29.6 
Over 30 
22 
18.6 
  8 
12.5 
14 
25.9 
Total 
118 
100 
64 
100 
54 
100 
 
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
71
O.V. Petrova, V.V. Sdobnikov. A Translation Teacher Profile in the Russian Context
The absence of Non-T group respondents
with less than 5 years of teaching experience
agrees with the tendency of recent graduates
having a non-translation degree not to engage in
teaching translation. Other results, however, do
not allow of any straightforward interpretation.
The thing is that there are respondents whose
translation experience exceeds their teaching
experience and vice versa. Some responses show
that a person with the teaching experience of 20–
30 years and more can have a very limited
experience in translating or interpreting (practically
never of both). At the same time responses show
that some people in the age group under 30 have
over 10 years of translation experience, which
means that they started practicing translation
before graduation.
It is necessary to admit that the results
concerning teaching experience are not very
reliable and need further verification. On the one
hand, the questionnaire was circulated among
translation teachers, so the question about teaching
experience implied teaching translation. It probably
should have been formulated in a more explicit
way. On the other hand, judging by what some
respondents have written in the comments, they
do not always differentiate between teaching
translation and teaching foreign languages and
consider translation to be an aspect of teaching a
language. Such comments were found in the senior
Non-T group. So it is possible that in some cases
the figures in the responses indicate the time a
person teaches both languages and translation.
Comments concerning practical translation also
show that not all translation trainers are at the same
time practitioners. Some respondents say it directly;
some others enumerate aspects of practical
translation they teach as an example of their practical
work as translators, which actually means they do
not practice translation professionally.
Another question in the survey relates to the
character of translation classes taught by the
respondents. The most remarkable and significant
is the following result: among 54 respondents who
teach theory of translation only 31 have a degree
in translation. It means that 23 translation theory
teachers are self-taught theorists.
What conclusions can be drawn from this
survey?
90.3% of teachers have no professional
education in teaching translation and interpreting.
Those with a degree in translation do it by copying
their own teachers. The quality and results of their
work depend to a large extent on how professional
those teachers were. Those having no degree in
translation do it empirically, taking their own
practical experience (if any) as a basis or
proceeding from general principles of didactics
and methods of teaching foreign languages.
Neither way can be adequate to the state of things
and new challenges in the present-day translation
market.
42.6% of those teaching theory of translation
have no education in translation at all. With due
respect for people who achieve great results by
means of self-education it is necessary to admit
that in many cases it leads to eclecticism that can
hardly serve as a sound theoretical basis for
professional training of translators and
interpreters.
Discussion
Overall analysis of the profession age
structure shows that a degree in translation is
more often found in younger groups of teachers,
while the majority of teachers constituting elder
groups have no such training.
In class, the older generation with a degree
in education is mainly guided by general didactic
principles and methods of language teaching, by
some eclectic, fragmentary recommendations and
guidelines randomly found in various teaching aids
(often with a purely linguistic approach to
Table 3. Translation / Interpreting experience
Translation / 
Interpreting 
experience 
(years) 
General result 
T group 
Non-T group 
Respondents 
% 
Respondents 
% 
Respondents 
% 
Less than 5 
21 
17.8 
10 
15.6 
11 
20.4 
5–10 
29 
24.6 
12 
18.8 
17 
31.5 
Over10 
68  
57.6 
42 
65.6 
26 
48.1 
Total 
118 
100 
64 
100 
54 
100 
 
72
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
translation), and by their own experience in
translation – if any. Having no education in the
subject they teach, they do not always realize that
translation is not just another aspect of teaching
language practice, but a specific type of language
mediation dealing more with sense and meanings
than with words and syntactic structures.
Another group of elder teachers (nearly
25%) do have professional training as translators.
They were taught by luminaries of translation and
inherited a system approach to the profession.
The younger generation has an advantage:
they have an education in the subject they teach.
But they lack education in translation didactics,
or, for that matter, in teaching anything at all. So,
they copy their teachers, which means they use
either the wrong didactic approach or the
approach of their teachers who had a systematic
understanding of translation. It all depends on
what teachers they had.
Whichever the case may be, the general
conclusion is that there are practically no translation
trainers in our universities professionally educated
in translation didactics. The fact that 75.4% of
them have completed short-time advanced training
courses does not change the situation radically.
Such courses, usually not longer than 36 class-
room (contact) hours, can hardly be considered
as a comprehensive program, the more so
because these 36 hours usually encompass
lectures on the theory of translation, master classes
in various aspects of practical translation (which
is another variety of the do-as-I-do approach),
sometimes even classes of language practice,
leaving no time for translation didactics proper.
Another problem with such courses is that their
program is usually developed on the assumption
that all listeners have a high enough level of
practical translation skills – which is often not the
case. So instead of discussing problems of
translation didactics it becomes necessary to try
to hastily patch up the gaps in the practical
translation skills of the retrainees. It is obvious
that with all these limitations and disadvantages
short-time advanced training courses cannot be
viewed as an adequate form of educating
translation trainers in translation didactics.
The figures showing that the majority of
teachers in the non-T group have a considerable
experience in practical translation is not in itself a
reason for too much optimism either. Practical
experience is indispensable. But if a person
translates something it does not necessarily mean
that they know how to do it and do it well. The
percentage of poor, amateurish, low quality
translations in the translation market today is
distressing. Practical experience is not yet a proof
of a translator’s high professional level.
Besides, a translation experience does not
always mean that the translator is knowledgeable
about the modern tools and technologies used
by translators and often required by agencies
today. So they are not able to teach their students
to use them.
Teaching Theory of Translation is another
problem. Analysis of the course descriptions
shows that the content of the course varies from
university to university but is practically never
perceived as the basis for developing translation
mode of thinking in students. In many cases it is a
more or less detailed retelling of various theories
and models merely for information, without any
attempt at purposeful analysis. So the very fact
that teachers from T group were themselves
taught Theory of Translation as part of their
professional training is not a guarantee either of
their translation mode of thinking or of their ability
to develop it in students.
Today translation market imperatively
demands from translators many skills unknown not
only to the non-T group, but also to many T group
teachers, especially belonging to the older
generation. It will suffice to mention the use of
various CATs or postediting techniques. Translation
teachers are responsible for equipping students with
the skills and knowledge adequate to the
requirements of the market. So, teachers
themselves must be taught everything that their
students are supposed to know, and taught at a
much higher level. Unfortunately, the current
practice does not provide a sufficiently effective
training of translation teachers in this respect.
Conclusions
The survey and its analysis show that there
is no integral profile of a translation teacher in
Russia today. There are categories and
subcategories of teachers according to their age,
training, teaching experience, translation expertise,
etc., with no clear-cut correspondences,
correlations, and regularities that would allow to
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 3
73
O.V. Petrova, V.V. Sdobnikov. A Translation Teacher Profile in the Russian Context
view them as a more or less consistent
conglomeration – except one thing: they all lack
training in translation didactics. Which means that
we need a comprehensive system for training and
retraining translation teachers.
NOTE
1 The reported study was funded by RFBR,
project number 20-013-00149 “The Basic Principles of
Training Translation Teachers”.
REFERENCES
Esfandiari M.R., Shokrpour N., Rahimi F., 2019. An
Evaluation of the EMT: Compatibility with the
Professional Translator’s Needs. Cogent Arts
and Humanities, no. 6, pp. 1-17.
Gouadec D., 2003. Notes on Translator-Training
(Replies to a Questionnaire). Pym A., Fallada C.,
Ramуn Biau J., Orenstein J., eds. Innovation &
E-Learning in Translator Training. Tarragona,
Universitat Rovira i Virgili. 98 p.
Kelly D., 2005. A Handbook for Translator Trainers:
A Guide to Reflective Practice. Manchester,
Saint Jerome. 173 p.
Kelly D., 2008. Training the Trainers: Towards a
Description of Translator Trainer Competence
and Training Needs Analysis. TTR, no. 21 (1),
pp. 99-125.
Kiraly D., 1995. Pathways to Translation. Pedagogy
and Process. Kent (Ohio), Kent State University
Press. 175 p.
Komissarov V., 2001. Sovremennoe perevodovedenie
[Modern Translation Studies]. Moscow, ETS
Publ. 424 p.
Lasnier F., 2000. Réussir la formation par compétences.
Montreal, Guérin. 504 p.
Li D., Zhang Ch., 2011. Knowledge Structure and
Training of Translation Teachers: An
Exploratory Study of Doctoral Programmes of
Translation Studies in Hong Kong. Meta,
no. 56 (3), pp. 693-712.
Mayoral R., 2003. Notes on Translator-Training
(Replies to a Questionnaire). Pym A., Fallada C.,
Ramуn Biau J., Orenstein J., eds. Innovation &
E-Learning in Translator Training. Tarragona,
Universitat Rovira i Virgili. 98 p.
Newmark P., 1991. About Translation. Clevedon,
Multilingual Matters. 184 p.
Orchard J., Winch Ch., 2015. What Training Do Teachers
Need? Why Theory Is Necessary To Good
Teaching. IMPACT. Philosophical Perspectives
on Education Policies, no. 22. 41 p.
Pavlović N., Antunović G., 2019. A Desirable Profile of
Translation Teacher: Perceptions and Needs in
the Croatian Context. TRAlinea Special Issue:
New Insights into Translator Training. URL:
http://www.intralinea.org/archive/article/2423
(accessed 19 February 2021).
Shlepnev D., Sdobnikov V., 2007. Rol i mesto kursa teorii
perevoda v professionalnoi podgotovke
perevodchika [Translation Theory in Training
Professional Translators]. Metodicheskie osnovy
podgotovki perevodchikov: nizhegorodsky opyt
[Methodological Basis for Translators Training:
Nizhny Novgorod Experience]. Nizhny Novgorod,
GOU VPO NGLU, pp. 105-109.
SOURCE
EMT – The EMT Translator Trainer Profile.
Competences of the Trainer of Translation. URL:
http://docplayer.net/14445272-The-emt-
translator-trainer-profile-competences-of-the-
trainer-in-translation.html (accessed 20 November
2020).
74
ГЛАВНАЯ ТЕМА НОМЕРА
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 3
Information About the Authors
Olga V. Petrova, Candidate of Sciences (Philology), Professor, Department of English, Translation
and Translatology, Head of the International Research Laboratory “Theoretical and Applied Issues in
Translation Studies”, Linguistics University of Nizhny Novgorod, Minina St, 31a, 603155 Nizhny Novgorod,
Russia, o.v.petrova.nn@gmail.com, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1781-7853
Vadim V. Sdobnikov, Doctor of Sciences (Philology), Associate Professor, Head of the Department
of English, Translation and Translatology, Linguistics University of Nizhny Novgorod, Minina St, 31a,
603155 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia, artist232@rambler.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4717-2980
Информация об авторах
Ольга Владимировна Петрова, кандидат филологических наук, профессор кафедры теории
и практики английского языка и перевода, руководитель Международной научно-исследовательс-
кой лаборатории «Теоретические и прикладные проблемы переводоведения», Нижегородский госу-
дарственный лингвистический университет им. Н.А. Добролюбова, ул. Минина, 31а, 603155 г. Ниж-
ний Новгород, Россия, o.v.petrova.nn@gmail.com, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1781-7853
Вадим Витальевич Сдобников, доктор филологических наук, доцент, заведующий ка-
федрой теории и практики английского языка и перевода, Нижегородский государственный линг-
вистический университет им. Н.А. Добролюбова, ул. Минина, 31а, 603155 г. Нижний Новгород,
Россия, artist232@rambler.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4717-2980
