Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 6
89
Sokolova N.V., 2021
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ

www.volsu.ru
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.6.8
UDC 81’322.4
Submitted: 11.01.2021
LBC 81.184
Accepted: 30.08.2021
MACHINE VS HUMAN TRANSLATION
IN THE SYNERGETIC TRANSLATION SPACE
Natalia V. Sokolova
Perm National Research Polytechnic University, Perm, Russia
Abstract. The paper focuses on English-to-Russian translations of patent applications on the website of the
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). A comparative analysis of patent applications is performed by
using translations made with the help of the WIPO Translate tool and human translators within the framework of
the synergetic translation space concept encompassing the domains of the author’s intensions, text content and
composition, energy, translator, recipient, and the translation acceptability notion. The translation erratology
aspects were considered from the point of view of the semantic, referential, and syntactic ambiguity within the
domains of content-composition and energy space. In the domain of the author, the intention to convey some
technical information is revealed, while its rendering in the content-composition and energy domains depends on
whether the translation is made by a person or a machine. Genre- and composition-related specifics have been
rendered in both cases while machine translation errors have been proven to result from the semantic, referential,
or syntactic ambiguity, and this is when the translated output is generally considered unacceptable by the recipient.
The results obtained can be used for editing machine translations of patent documentation, assessing the quality
of technical documentation translation that is referred to other specific genre conventions.
Key words: patent application, machine translation, ambiguity, acceptability, editing, synergetic approach.
Citation. Sokolova N.V. Machine vs Human Translation in the Synergetic Translation Space. Vestnik
Volgogradskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta. Seriya 2. Yazykoznanie [Science  Journal  of  Volgograd  State
University. Linguistics], 2021, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 89-98. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.6.8
УДК 81’322.4
Дата поступления статьи: 11.01.2021
ББК 81.184
Дата принятия статьи: 30.08.2021
МАШИННЫЙ ПЕРЕВОД VS ПЕРЕВОД, ВЫПОЛНЕННЫЙ ЧЕЛОВЕКОМ,
В СИНЕРГЕТИЧЕСКОМ ПЕРЕВОДЧЕСКОМ ПРОСТРАНСТВЕ
Наталья Владимировна Соколова
Пермский национальный исследовательский политехнический университет, г. Пермь, Россия
Аннотация. В статье на материале патентных заявок, представленных на веб-сайте Всемирной организации
интеллектуальной собственности (WIPO), рассматриваются лингвистические проблемы перевода с английского
языка на русский. Осуществлен сопоставительный анализ переводов патентных заявок, выполненных с помощью
инструмента WIPO Translate и человека, в рамках синергетической концепции переводческого пространства,
включающей поля автора, содержания и композиции, переводчика, реципиента, а также энергетическое поле, и
опирающейся на понятие приемлемости перевода. Эрратологические аспекты перевода охарактеризованы с
точки зрения смысловой, референциальной и синтаксической неоднозначности в рамках содержательного, ком-
позиционного и энергетического полей. Установлено, что в переводах, выполненных машиной и человеком, в
поле автора патентной заявки реализуется намерение передать техническую информацию. Показано, что в содер-
жательном, композиционном и энергетическом полях жанрово-композиционные особенности заявки переданы в
переводах обоих типов, а при наличии в оригинале смысловой, референциальной или синтаксической неоднознач-
ности в машинном переводе присутствовали ошибки, а текст перевода воспринимался реципиентом как непри-
емлемый. Результаты исследования могут быть использованы при редактировании машинных переводов патент-
ной документации, а также при оценивании качества перевода технической документации других жанров.
90
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 6
Ключевые слова: патентная заявка, машинный перевод, неоднозначность, приемлемость, редактиро-
вание, синергетический подход.
Цитирование. Соколова Н. В. Машинный перевод vs перевод, выполненный человеком, в синергети-
ческом переводческом пространстве // Вестник Волгоградского государственного университета. Серия 2,
Языкознание. – 2021. – Т. 20, № 6. – С. 89–98. – (На англ. яз.). – DOI: https://doi.org/10.15688/jvolsu2.2021.6.8
Introduction
The role of technical texts, or texts pertaining
to the subject area of technology [Lotman, 2000;
2010, p. 67] and conveying respective information,
is becoming increasingly important.
Currently, we are witnessing an
unprecedented growth of technical information –
an umbrella term describing any technology-related
data such as technical know-how, standards and
specifications, invention and innovation disclosures,
patent applications and drawings, manuals, etc. For
example, the number of patent applications
worldwide has demonstrated a three-fold increase
within the period of 2002–2016, according to the
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).
Pertaining to the domain of technology [Lotman,
2010, p. 17], technical texts play their role in
disseminating specific technical knowledge.
Technical information can be further
disseminated through translation into other
languages. The amount of technical translation
accounts for a great proportion of the world’s
translation output [Franco Aixelá, 2004].
Moreover, technical translation itself often
involves utilizing technology. One cannot but
witness a growing tendency to have technical
texts – such as patent applications – translated
via a variety of machine translation tools powered
by IT giants.
The intricacies of technical translation have
been approached by scholars, with lexical aspects
[Shershukova, 2017; Trinozhenko, Goncharova,
2016] or the translator being in focus [Fontanet,
2016], etc. Speculations about the pros and cons
of machine vs. human translation are also
underway [Zhaorong Zong, 2018].
Within the domain of linguistics, the word-
sense, referential, and syntactic ambiguity types
have been proven to be the reason behind machine
translation errors [Linares, 2008] (see also:
[Sokolova, 2019]) which can be explained by the
fact that words may have more than one meaning,
referent, and can be used in complicated syntactic
structures [Linares, 2008, p. 3].
These findings focus on the linguistic material
and its translated output leaving the process of
translation and its stakeholders behind, along with
genre-related aspects. These assumptions make
us believe that a broader approach should be
applied to human-produced and machine
translations of technical texts within the area of
translation studies.
This paper does not intend to unravel the
misconceptions intertwined with technical
translation and brilliantly exposed by Jody Byrne
[Byrne, 2004; 2006] such as those of technical
translation including economics, law, business
etc. and being a non-creative transfer process
[Byrne, 2006].
Investigating the technical translation process
within a framework embracing the stakeholders
and the output of technical translation produced by
humans and machines, the paper aims at comparing
such output in terms of acceptability.
Material and methodology
When it comes to technical texts, patent
documents are of particular interest as they deliver
cutting-edge technical knowledge. The European
Patent Office (EPO), the United States Patent
and Trademark Office (USPTO) are among the
institutions accumulating and disseminating patent
data. The World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO) maintains a special database –
PATENTSCOPE (WIPO PATENSCOPE)
providing access to over 90 million patent
documents and 4 million published international
patent applications regardless of country specifics.
In addition, the WIPO provides database users
with a custom machine translation tool – WIPO
Translate.
The paper draws on the English language
patents of the WIPO PATENTSCOPE database
as the material of the study in the amount of
120,000 characters and their human-produced and
machine translations into Russian. The machine
translations coming under scrutiny are generated
using the custom WIPO Translate tool specifically
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 6
91
N.V. Sokolova. Machine vs Human Translation in the Synergetic Translation Space
trained in the subject area of patents. Human
translations were made by professional
translators. The English language patents under
study pertain to the subject area of information
technology and related embodiments in the
linguistic field.
According to the WIPO maintaining the
PATENTSCOPE database, a technology patent
“is an exclusive right to a product or a process
that generally provides a new way of doing
something or offers a new technical solution to a
problem. To get a patent, technical information
about the invention must be disclosed to the public
in a patent application” (FAQ).
Since the technical translation process
involves several stakeholders, and the relevant
information should be taken into account, the
synergetic translation space approach elaborated
by L.V. Kushnina [Kushnina, 2004] might have a
potential of explaining the complex process of any
translation type, including the technical one.
We assume that this all-encompassing
synergetic translation space approach could
provide for investigating the technical translation
process within the framework of the domains
outlined below:
– the author’s domain conveying the
intention of the author to render some information
in a particular way;
– the composition- and content-related
domain which contains terms while their adequate
translation ensures the successful transposition of
factual meanings; the word-sense, referential, and
syntactic ambiguity will come under scrutiny in
this respect;
– the energy-related domain of technical
texts containing both verbal means such as
official clichés rendering emotive meanings and
nonverbal means including figures, drawings, etc.
[Ketola, 2015];
– the translator’s domain which is
intertwined with the translator’s understanding of
the author’s intention to be eventually transposed
to and embodied in the target text;
– the recipient’s domain within which the
target text becomes part and parcel of the
recipient’s culture [Kushnina, 2013] (see also:
[Larson, 1987]).
This approach provides for transposing factual
and emotive meanings of the source text and
transplanting them into the target text and culture
[Kushnina, 2004]. The target text should not be
identical to the source one; it must sound natural
instead [Kushnina, 2013] being acceptable to the
target culture.
The paper also makes use of terms such as
word-sense ambiguity, with “words having more
than one possible meaning or sense” [Linares, 2008,
p. 3; Miftakhova, 2017]; referential ambiguity for
words having more than one referent [Linares,
2008, p. 3]; and syntactic ambiguity [Linares, 2008,
p. 3], which may result in translation errors.
This is when the notion of acceptability
should be emphasized as “subscription to norms
originating in the target culture determines...
acceptability” [Toury, 1995, p. 57].
J. Byrne stresses that the aim of technical
translation is to achieve a high level of
acceptability because technical texts are
intended to function as a target language text
[Byrne, 2006, p. 37] while M. Larson points out
that “the goal of most translators is to produce
translations which are acceptable for the
audiences for whom the translations are
produced” [Larson, 1987, p. 69].
It is also of crucial importance within the
context of this paper to focus on the notions of
text and genre as “at a general level, text refers
to a sequence of sentences serving an overall
rhetorical purpose... genre refers to the
conventional linguistic expression associated
with speech and writing in certain contexts of
situation (e.g. the letter to the editor)” [Baker,
Saldanha (eds.), 2011, p. 89]. Ultimately, genres
demonstrate definite and relatively stable
typical forms as a whole [Bakhtin, 1986].
Patents constitute a genre of their own
which makes it possible for us to investigate both
the conventional expressions of the patent genre
and their textual realization from the perspective
of the translation space approach both in the
source and target texts of information technology
patent documents translated by humans and with
the help of the WIPO Translate tool.
Thus, the methodology framework to be
applied to human and machine translations of
patent documents provides for:
1) selecting patent documents and having
them translated both with the help of human
translators and the WIPO Translate tool;
2) investigating the source and target texts –
both machine- and human-produced ones – within
92
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 6
the domains of the author, content, energy,
translator, recipient;
3) comparing the machine- and human-
produced translation output in terms of its
acceptability.
Results and discussion
The author’s domain
First of all, translation can be generally
perceived as a communicative act involving the
author, the translator, and the reader [Byrne, 2006,
p. 11] so it is the intention [Klushina, 2012] of the
author that is crucial in generating the source text
and determining its function.
The author’s intention to present technical
information of patent documents results in their
primarily informative function, but “there is more
to technical translation than simply transmitting
information. Instead, the challenge for technical
communicators is to ensure that all the relevant
information is indeed conveyed but also that it is
conveyed in such a way that the readers can use
the information easily, properly and effectively”
[Byrne, 2006, p. 10]. “...The sole purpose is to
communicate technical information clearly and
efficiently” [Byrne, 2006, p. 175].
Thus, the author’s intention determines the
informative function of technical texts such as
patent documents and – respectively – technical
translation as a process of communicating relevant
information and its resulting output.
The composition and content domain
The intention of the author’s domain to
provide new technical information clearly and
precisely manifests itself in a specific content of
patent documents within the framework of the
genre-specific composition.
Typically, the genre of patents has conventional
composition parts such as summary, related
applications, technical field, background art
which can be rendered into Russian as реферат,
родственные заявки, область техники / тех-
нического применения, уровень техники,
respectively.
The invention summary gives a general
description while the brief description of the
drawings (описание чертежей) and
description of specific embodiments (описа-
ние внедрений) focus on drawings and
invention applications. Via Claims (формула
изобретения), one can get familiarized with
methodological guidelines. Eventually, the parts
of patent applications work together to deliver
all the relevant technical information both in the
verbal and nonverbal forms such as drawings
and figures, with the titles of the patent parts
being conventionally translated into Russian as
specified above.
The custom WIPO tool trained to translate
patent documents demonstrates that it can handle
the challenges of choosing the proper word within
the patent subject area when it comes to genre-
specific titles as can be seen in the machine
translations below since the technical field and
background are rendered as область техни-
ки и уровень техники in line with the genre-
specific clichés accepted in the Russian technical
language and culture:
(1) TECHNICAL  FIELD
The present disclosure is generally related to
computer systems, and is more specifically related
to systems and methods for automated translation
of electronic documents from one or more source
natural language to one or more target natural
languages.
Machine translation: Область техники
Настоящее раскрытие в целом относится к
компьютерным системам и, более конкретно, от-
носится к системам и способам автоматического
перевода электронных документов из одного или
более источников естественного языка на один или
более целевых естественных языков.
(2) BACKGROUND
Language translation computer programs
perform reasonably well for formal content in well-
studied languages (e.g., English, French, Spanish,
German, and others). However, for other language, as
well as informal or subject area-specific content, a user
has often resort to human translation and hence bear
the associated costs (US20160259760).
Machine translation: Уровень техники
Компьютерные программы машинного пере-
вода достаточно хорошо работают для формально-
го содержания на хорошо изученных языках (на-
пример, английский, французский, испанский, не-
мецкий и другие). Однако для другого языка, а так-
же неформального или тематически определенно-
го содержания, пользователь часто прибегает к
трансляции человека и, следовательно, поддер-
живает связанные с ними затраты.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 6
93
N.V. Sokolova. Machine vs Human Translation in the Synergetic Translation Space
At the same time, the machine translation
excerpt (2) above demonstrates the wrong and
non-acceptable rendering of the term human
translation as трансляция человека instead of
перевод, выполненный человеком.
This fact shows that polysemantic words and
their word-sense ambiguity as well as the proper
choice of factual meanings still pose a major challenge
even to genre-trained machine translation tools. As
for those conventional genre-specific clichés such as
titles of patent sections, the machine can easily and
errorfree replace them with their Russian equivalents
within the context of the patent genre.
The author’s intention to describe the
invention in the most detailed and precise manner
could also result in using terms in the form of
multi-component collocations [Vlavatskaya, 2011,
p. 135] when end words are preceded with other
ones, for example, a Web search engine user
interface; an enterprise cloud computing
platform; the search engine user interface, etc.
(WO2017151408). As a result, translators deal not
only with rendering the meanings of terms but also
with challenges of disentangling multi-component
collocations and their syntactic relations.
The patent document (WO2017034824)
below features a variety of multi-component
collocations such as the source language, the
target language, web pages, a web page copy,
the human translators translations, etc. There
are also attributes such as participles and clauses
identifying these nouns in detects a second request
for the web page from a computing device
associated with the target language and in
response to detecting the second request outputs
to the computing device the translated web page
with additional content (WO2017034824). One
can come across subordinate clauses such as
while machine translation is typically faster
and less expensive, manual translation can
typically provide higher quality translations
(WO2017034824).
Below are the analyzed excerpts translated
by a human translator and rendered with the help
of the WIPO Translate tool, respectively:
(3) In response to receiving a first request to opt
in to the translation feature the server: detects a
second request for the web page from a computing
device associated with the target language and in
response to detecting the second request outputs to
the computing device the translated web page with
additional content relevant to the computing device
or a user associated with the computing device
(WO2017034824).
Human translation: В ответ на получение пер-
вого запроса на выполнение перевода сервер: от-
слеживает второй запрос веб-страницы, поступа-
ющий от компьютерного устройства, связанного с
работой на языке перевода, и в ответ на второй
полученный запрос загружает на устройство пере-
веденную веб-страницу с дополнительной инфор-
мацией, относящейся к устройству или пользова-
телю устройства.
Machine translation: В ответ на прием перво-
го запроса на выполнение перевода сервер: обна-
руживает второй запрос web-страницы из вычис-
лительного устройства, связанного с целевым язы-
ком, и в ответ на обнаружение вторых запросов
запроса на вычислительное устройство передает пе-
реведенную web-страницу с дополнительным со-
держанием, релевантным для вычислительного ус-
тройства, или пользователя, ассоциативно связан-
ного с вычислительным устройством.
The comparison of the human and machine
translations above makes it evident that the
content-related domain is rendered in the
machine translation output improperly as the
multi-component term target language
conventionally translated into Russian as язык
перевода is conveyed as целевой язык. At the
same time, it is also of particular interest that
the term целевой язык is becoming more
pervasive these days as compared to the
traditional term язык перевода.
The referential and syntactic ambiguity is also
a challenge, with the part additional content
relevant to the computing device or a user
associated with the computing device rendered
as дополнительным содержанием, релеван-
тным для вычислительного устройства, или
пользователя, ассоциативно связанного с
вычислительным устройством. In comparison,
the human translation output above demonstrates a
variety of techniques relevant in the context which
make the resulting output acceptable.
The next example below demonstrates again
that the machine translation tool fails to render
the terms due to the word-sense and referential
ambiguity, with manual translation being
conveyed as ручная трансляция, while the
human translator opted for using the antonymous
translation немашинный перевод:
94
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 6
(4) While machine translation is typically faster
and less expensive, manual translation can typically
provide higher quality translations (WO2017034824).
Machine translation: Хотя машинное преоб-
разование обычно является более быстрым и ме-
нее дорогостоящим, ручная трансляция может,
как правило, предоставлять переводы более высо-
кого качества.
Human translation: Несмотря на то, что ма-
шинный перевод чаще оказывается быстрее и де-
шевле, немашинный, как правило, отличается бо-
лее высоким качеством.
One cannot but conclude that the
acceptability is not the case when terms and
multi-component collocations within the content-
related domain of patent documents are
translated using machine tools as opposed to and
compared with translations made by humans.
Machines are “baffled” by the word-sense
ambiguity [Linares, 2008] of terms in the context
such as translation – перевод – трансляция,
machine translation – машинный перевод –
машинная трансляция, etc., with this type of
ambiguity being the result of using “words having
more than one possible meaning or sense”
[Linares, 2008, p. 3; Miftakhova, 2017].
The author’s intention to define the notions
as comprehensively and precisely as possible also
results in using descriptive participles and clauses,
for example:
(5) Also presented are a server having one or
more processors configured to perform operations and
a computer-readable medium...
Machine translation: Также представлены сер-
вер, имеющий один или более процессоров, скон-
фигурированных для выполнения операций, и ма-
шиночитаемый носитель...
And the machine translation above
demonstrates the fact that this type of the syntactic
ambiguity is an obstacle overcome since the linear
syntactical structures of patent texts can be easily
transposed to the target language.
Thus, the conventional titles of patent parts –
background, summary, etc. – can be rendered
equally acceptably both by humans and the WIPO
Translate tool trained using the patent genre
features. This statement is also true of syntactic
structures consisting of nouns and identified with
participles and clauses which are typical of the
patent genre.
However, when it comes to the ambiguity
of polysemantic words and the referential
ambiguity in the patent texts, the machine
translation tool happens to be incapable of
choosing the proper factual meaning in the context
while the human translator makes proper choices.
The energy domain
There is a stereotype that patents deliver
information in the most impassionate way, and it
turns out to be untrue when taking a closer look
at the conventional composition of patent
applications and their textual content.
As mentioned earlier, the Background
section of patent applications describes the
problem associated with the current state of
technology which might be too slow, too
expensive, not easy to use, etc. This is when
the proposed invention is supposed to be helpful
in solving this problem. And this is when the
emotive meanings may come forward in the
Background section due to conveying the
persuasive intention of the author and setting the
positive tonality [Matveeva, 2006] of the section
offering some cutting-edge solution to the
problem specified.
The analysis of the patent document below
(US20120215521) shows that the Background
section can be built around the antithesis of the
prior, present, and the future state of things, with
the prior or present ones being problematic and
the invention method being effective, accurate,
necessary, enabling users to clearly and
easily communicate, etc. The emotive words
can also be accompanied by intensifiers such as
highly, etc.:
(6) The present invention is a software
application that is designed to allow individuals, who
speak different languages, to clearly and easily
communicate with each other. <...> Users may speak
or type messages with the software application and
then press a “translate” button to select a language in
order to send the message in that language. <...>
Many individuals find themselves in situations
that require knowledge of other languages. While
vacationing, working, or visiting areas in which the
native language is unfamiliar, individuals may find
themselves unable to communicate with the people
around them. This can be highly problematic,
especially if these individuals become lost, are sent to
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 6
95
N.V. Sokolova. Machine vs Human Translation in the Synergetic Translation Space
the hospital, or find themselves in other emergency
situations (US20120215521).
Machine translation: Настоящее изобретение
представляет собой приложение программного
обеспечения, которое предназначено для того, что-
бы дать возможность людям, которые говорят на
разных языках, ясно и легко связываться друг с дру-
гом. Пользователи могут говорить или тип сооб-
щений с приложением программного обеспечения
и затем нажать кнопку “транслировать” для того,
чтобы выбрать язык для того, чтобы послать сооб-
щение на этом языке.
Многие люди находят себя в ситуациях, кото-
рые требуют знания других языков. В то время как
истощение, обработка или посещающие области, в
которых родной язык неизвестны, индивидуумы
могут найти себя неспособным связаться с людь-
ми вокруг них. Это может быть весьма проблема-
тичным, особенно если эти люди потеряны, отправ-
лены в больницу или находят себя в других чрезвы-
чайных ситуациях.
Human translation: Настоящее изобретение
представляет собой программное приложение,
которое предназначено для того, чтобы предос-
тавить возможность людям, говорящим на раз-
ных языках, легко общаться и понимать друг
друга. <...> Пользователи могут произнести или
напечатать сообщение, а затем нажать кнопку
«перевод», чтобы выбрать язык и отправить со-
общение на этом языке. <...>
Многие оказываются в ситуациях, когда не-
обходимо знание языков. В отпуске, на работе
либо при посещении территорий, где говорят на
неизвестном языке, люди не могут вступить в
общение с окружающими. Это может быть весь-
ма проблематичным, особенно если человек
заблудился, попал в больницу или оказался в чрез-
вычайной ситуации.
The patent excerpts above feature
qualitative adjectives and adverbs such as
easily and highly problematic among others,
which may not be considered typical of ‘dry’
technical texts. However, within this context,
such words serve to render the persuasive
intention of the author trying to provide some
substantiation for the invention. To describe the
current situation, the negatively-charged
adjective highly problematic is used while the
positively-charged one – easily – demonstrates
the benefits of the solution described in the
patent document.
As it turns out, all the qualitative
adjectives and adverbs of the energy domain
are rendered properly both in the human and
machine translations since they have the literal
meaning easy which means легкий, etc. in this
context.
However, acceptability is not achieved in the
content-related domain of the machine translation
due to numerous errors resulting from the world-
sense and syntactical ambiguity whereas
vacationing, working, or visiting areas are
translated as истощение, обработка или по-
сещающие области, etc.
This is also true of one more manifestation
of the energy field in patent documentation such
as metaphorical idioms. For example, the idiom
word of mouth – the verbal sharing of
information (Free Dictionary) – is used for
describing aspects of creating patent databases
as a result of word-of-mouth referrals. The
machine translation (7) where this idiom is
rendered as слов-референтов в ротовой по-
лости is unacceptable:
(7) Physicians typically derive their patient base from
word-of-mouth referrals. These word of mouth referrals
generally come from former patients (WO2001035275).
Machine translation: Врачи, как правило, по-
лучают свое основание пациента из слов-референ-
тов в ротовой полости. Эти слова, относящиеся к
рту, как правило, поступают от прежних пациен-
тов. Таким образом, врачи зависят от пациентов
при построении основы пациента.
Human translation: Как правило, база паци-
ентов врачей-терапевтов формируется на основа-
нии устных рекомендаций, которые предоставляют
бывшие пациенты.
As compared to the machine translation
above, the human-produced translation
demonstrates a completely different picture, with
the idiom rendered properly.
The translator’s and the recipient’s domains
The examples evidence the fact that it is
the human translator who is capable of
assembling and making sense of all the domains
of the author’s intention, genre composition and
terminology content, as well as the emotive
energy in order to deliver an acceptable
translation output.
To assess such acceptability from the point
of view of the recipient, a questionnaire was
created and shown in a table below. With two
96
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 6
translators in the area having been questioned to
range these translations within the acceptable –
partly acceptable – unacceptable criteria:
Target patent 
application translation 
Human 
Machine 
Content domain 
Acceptable 
Unacceptable 
Composition domain 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Energy domain 
Acceptable 
Partly acceptable / 
Unacceptable 
 
As it follows from the table, the answers
are identical when it comes to the content and
composition domain. As for the energy domain,
the answers range from partly acceptable to
unacceptable providing assessments to the
translation of separate emotive words such as
highly problematic and idioms.
The machine translations under study lack
acceptability mostly in the domains of rendering
the author’s intention, terminology content, and
energy since the translation is a purposeful activity
[Nord, 1997] – being far from a mere and primitive
word-by-word substitution.
Undeniably, the machine translation tool
under study shows progress in conveying the
conventional translations of the genre-specific
titles and linear syntactical structures along with
single emotive words such as adjectives and
adverbs while the idioms and culture-acceptable
use of words leave the software tool ‘baffled’.
Conclusion
Patent documents account for a great
proportion of technical translation, with machine
translation tools often touted as providing a
solution, which the recipient might need in terms
of getting comprehensible information. However,
the translations produced by the WIPO Translate
tool demonstrate that the machine translations
of patents contain errors resulting from the
semantic, referential, and syntactic ambiguity as
compared to the patent translations made by
humans. The premises come from the
comparative analysis of the machine and human
patent translations that was performed within the
framework of the synergetic translation space
concept, spanning the domains of the author,
content and composition, energy, translator,
recipient, and acceptability.
The synergetic translation space approach
proved to be instrumental in unraveling the myth
of coming-to-rescue machine translation since –
despite the progress made – only purposefully
produced human translations demonstrate a viable
potential of delivering the target culture-acceptable
output fitting within all the translation domains of
the author, composition, content, energy, and
recipient and delivering their synergy while the
machine translation tool can handle the process only
within the conventional aspects of the patent genre
composition. Assessing acceptability of rendering
pointed to certain disparity in the content-
composition and energy domains, as the technical
and emotive information encoded by the author is
delivered more accurately by a human translator.
Genre- and composition-related specifics have been
rendered in both cases while the machine
translation errors in the content and energy domains
have been proven to result from the semantic,
referential, or syntactic ambiguity, and this is when
the translated output is generally considered
unacceptable by the recipient.
The outlined findings could be instrumental
in paving the way for improving machine
translation quality and acceptability as perceived
by human recipients.
REFERENCES
Bakhtin M.M., 1986. Problema rechevykh zhanrov [The
Problem of Speech Genres]. Estetika slovesnogo
tvorchestva [The Aesthetics of Verbal Creativity].
Moscow, Iskusstvo Publ., pp. 250-296.
Baker M., Saldanha G., eds., 2011. Routledge
Encyclopedia of Translation Studies. London
and New York, Routledge, Taylor and Francis
Group. 22. 674 p.
Byrne J., 2004. Textual Cognetics and the Role of
Iconic Linkage in Software User Guides.
Doctoral Dissertation. Dublin, Dublin City
University. 357 p.
Byrne J., 2006. Technical Translation. Usability
Strategies for Translating Technical
Documentation. Netherlands, Springer, 13. 280 p.
Fontanet M., 2003. The Technical Translator: The
Sherlock Holmes of Translation? ATA Chronicle,
2013, July, vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 18-26. URL: https://
www.ata-chronicle.online/wp-content/uploads/
4207_18_mathilde_fontanet.pdf (accessed
28 November 2020).
Franco Aixelá J., 2004. The Study of Technical and
Scientific Translation: An Examination of Its
Historical Development. Journal of Specialised
Translation, no. 1, pp. 29-49.
Science Journal of  VolSU. Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 20. No. 6
97
N.V. Sokolova. Machine vs Human Translation in the Synergetic Translation Space
Ketola A., 2015. Translation Diaries of an Illustrated
Technical Text. Connexions International
Professional Communication Journal, no. 3 (2),
pp. 13-40.
Klushina N.I., 2012. Intentsionalnyi metod v
sovremennoi lingvisticheskoi paradigm
[Intentional Method in the Modern Linguistic
Paradigm]. Mediastilistka [Mediastylistics],
iss. 4. URL: http://mediascope.ru/node/1242
(accessed 10 January 2021).
Kushnina L.V., 2004. Vzaimodeistvie yazykov i kultur
v perevodcheskom prostranstve: geshtalt-
sinergeticheskii podkhod: dis. ... d-ra filol. nauk
[The Interaction of Languages and Cultures in
the Translation Space: The Gestalt-Synergetic
Approach. Dr. philol. sci. diss.]. Perm. 437 p.
Kushnina L.V., 2013. Funktsionirovanie tekhnicheskikh
tekstov v perevodcheskom prostranstve [The
Functioning of Technical Texts in the Translation
Space]. Filologicheskie nauki. Voprosy teorii i
praktiki [Philological Sciences. Issues of Theory
and Practice], no. 11 (29), part 2, pp. 119-121.
Larson M., 1987. Establishing Project-Specific Criteria
for Acceptability of Translations. Rose M.G., ed.
Translation 
Excellence: 
Assessment,
Achievement, Maintenance. American
Translators 
Association 
Scholarly
Monographs. Binghamton, New York,
University Center, State University of New York,
pp. 69-76.
Linares J.A.G., 2008. Empirical Machine Translation
and Its Evaluation. Doctoral Dissertation.
Barcelona. 247 p.
Lotman Yu.M., 2000. Semiosfera [Semiosphere]. Saint
Petersburg, Iskusstvo-SPB Publ. 704 p.
Lotman Yu.M., 2010. Nepredskazuemye mekhanizmy
kultury [Unpredictable Mechanisms of Culture].
Tallinn, TLU Press. 232 p.
Matveeva T.V., 2006. Tekstovaya kategoriya [Textual
Category]. Kozhina M.N., ed. Stilisticheskii
entsiklopedicheskii slovar russkogo yazyka
[The Stylistic Encyclopedic Dictionary of the
Russian Language]. Moscow, Flinta Publ.,
Nauka Publ., pp. 549-552.
Miftakhova R.G., 2017. Formalizatsiya estestvennogo
yazyka v mashinnom perevode s oporoi na
dopolnitel’nyi korpus rodstvennogo yazyka: dis. ...
kand. filol. nauk [Formalizing the Natural Language
Using the Additional Corpus of the Related
Language. Cand. philol. sci. diss.]. Ufa. 187 p.
Nord C., 1997. Translating As a Purposeful Activity.
Manchester, St. Jerome Publishing. 154 p.
Shershukova N.V., 2017. Spetsifika perevoda
nauchnykh i tekhnicheskikh tekstov (patentov)
[Specifics of Translating Scientific and
Technical Texts (Patents)]. Filologicheskie
nauki. Voprosy teorii i praktiki [Philological
Sciences. Issues of Theory and Practice],
no. 3 (69), part 2, pp. 182-184.
Sokolova N.V., 2019. Mashinnyi perevod patentov:
tipichnye oshibki [Machine Patent Translation:
Typical Errors]. Mezhkulturnaya kommunikatsiya:
lingvisticheskie aspekty: sb. materialov
VIII Mezhdunar. nauch.-prakt. konf. (28–29 marta
2019 g.) [Intercultural Communication: Linguistic
Aspects. Proceedings of the 8th International
Scientific and Practical Conference (March 28–29,
2019)]. Novosibirsk, Novosibirskiy gosudarstvennyi
tekhnicheskiy universitet, pp. 173-178.
Toury G., 1995. Descriptive Translation Studies and
Beyond. Amsterdam, Philadelphia, John
Benjamins. 311 p.
Trinozhenko M.D., Goncharova Yu.L., 2016. Spetsifika
perevoda patentnoi dokumentatsii [Specifics of
Translating Patent Documents]. Yunyi
issledovatel Dona [Don’s Young Researcher],
no. 1 (1), pp. 1-6.
Vlavatskaya M.V., 2011. Teoreticheskie problemy
kombinatornoi lingvistiki. Leksikologiya.
Leksikografiya [Theoretical Issues of
Combinatorial Linguistics. Lexicology.
Lexicography]. Novosibirsk, NGTU. 508 p.
Zhaorong Zong, 2018. Research on the Relations
Between Machine Translation and Human
Translation. Journal of Physics: Conferences
Series, vol. 1087, iss. 06, pp. 1-6. DOI: 10.1088/
1742-6596/1087/6/062046.
SOURCES
EPO – European Patent Office. URL: https://
www.epo.org/ (accessed 10 January 2021).
FAQ – Frequently Asked Questions: Patents. URL:
https://www.wipo.int/patents/en/faq_
patents.html (accessed 10 January 2021).
Free Dictionary – Free Dictionary. URL: https://idioms.
thefreedictionary.com/word-of-mouth (accessed
10 January 2021).
USPTO – United States Patent and Trademark Office.
URL: https://www.uspto.gov/patents-application-
process/search-patents (accessed 10 January
2021).
US20120215521 – Software Application Method to
Translate an Incoming Message, an Outgoing
Message, or a User Input Text // WIPO
PATENSCOPE. URL: https://patentscope.
wi po.i nt/ sear ch/ ru/deta il.jsf?docId=
US74346340&tab= PCTDESCRIPTION&_cid=
P10-K1QKXL-27077-1 (accessed 10 January 2021).
US20160259760 – Automated Document Translation
// WIPO PATENSCOPE. URL: https://
98
МЕЖКУЛЬТУРНАЯ КОММУНИКАЦИЯ
Вестник ВолГУ. Серия 2, Языкознание. 2021. Т. 20. № 6
Information About the Author
Natalia V. Sokolova, Candidate of Sciences (Philology), Assistant Professor, Department of Foreign
Languages, Linguistics and Translation, Perm National Research Polytechnic University,
Prosp. Komsomolsky, 29, 614990 Perm, Russia, ntlk0@mail.ru, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0550-2272
Информация об авторе
Наталья Владимировна Соколова, кандидат филологических наук, доцент кафедры
иностранных языков, лингвистики и перевода, Пермский национальный исследовательский по-
литехнический университет, просп. Комсомольский, 29, 614990 г. Пермь, Россия, ntlk0@mail.ru,
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0550-2272
patentscope.wipo.int/search/ru/detail.jsf?
docId=US177603917&tab=PCTDESCRIPTION&_
cid=P10-K3G6FH-49819-2 
(accessed
10 January 2021).
WO2001035275 – Building Metaphor // WIPO
PATENSCOPE. URL: https://patentscope.
wipo.int/ search /en/detail.jsf?docId=
WO2001035275&_cid=P20-KJRFXZ-74690-1
(accessed 10 January 2021).
WO2017034824 – Techniques for Crowd Sourcing
Human Translations to Provide Translated
Versions of Web Pages with Additional Content
// WIPO PATENSCOPE. URL: https://
patentscope.wipo.int/search/ru/detail.jsf?
docId=WO2017034824&_cid=P10-K3D8ET-
84783-1 (accessed 10 January 2021).
WO2017151408 – Blending Enterprise Content and Web
Results // WIPO PATENSCOPE. URL: https://
patentscope.wipo.int/search/ru/detail.jsf?docId=
WO2017151408&tab=PCTBIBLIO&_cid=P20-
JY16IZ-51668-1 (accessed 10 January 2021).
WIPO – World Intellectual Property Organization. URL:
https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/
wipo_pub_941_2017-chapter2.pdf (accessed 10
January 2021).
WIPO PATENTSCOPE – WIPO PATENTSCOPE. URL:
https://www.wipo. 
int/patentscope/en/
(accessed 10 January 2021).
